Alice in Wonderland	alice's adventures in wonderland  lewis carroll  the millennium fulcrum edition 3.0     chapter i. down the rabbit-hole  alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations in it, 'and what is the use of a book,' thought alice 'without pictures or conversations?'
Alice in Wonderland	so she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a white rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her.
Alice in Wonderland	there was nothing so very remarkable in that; nor did alice think it so very much out of the way to hear the rabbit say to itself, 'oh dear!
Alice in Wonderland	oh dear!
Alice in Wonderland	i shall be late!'
Alice in Wonderland	(when she thought it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural); but when the rabbit actually took a watch out of its waistcoat-pocket, and looked at it, and then hurried on, alice started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a large rabbit-hole under the hedge.
Alice in Wonderland	in another moment down went alice after it, never once considering how in the world she was to get out again.
Alice in Wonderland	the rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that alice had not a moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very deep well.
Alice in Wonderland	either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what was going to happen next.
Alice in Wonderland	first, she tried to look down and make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; then she looked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled with cupboards and book-shelves; here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs.
Alice in Wonderland	she took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed; it was labelled 'orange marmalade', but to her great disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she fell past it.
Alice in Wonderland	'well!'
Alice in Wonderland	thought alice to herself, 'after such a fall as this, i shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs!
Alice in Wonderland	how brave they'll all think me at home!
Alice in Wonderland	why, i wouldn't say anything about it, even if i fell off the top of the house!'
Alice in Wonderland	(which was very likely true.)
Alice in Wonderland	down, down, down.
Alice in Wonderland	would the fall never come to an end!
Alice in Wonderland	'i wonder how many miles i've fallen by this time?'
Alice in Wonderland	she said aloud.
Alice in Wonderland	'i must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth.
Alice in Wonderland	let me see: that would be four thousand miles down, i think--' (for, you see, alice had learnt several things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a very good opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) '--yes, that's about the right distance--but then i wonder what latitude or longitude i've got to?'
Alice in Wonderland	(alice had no idea what latitude was, or longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to say.)
Alice in Wonderland	presently she began again.
Alice in Wonderland	'i wonder if i shall fall right through the earth!
Alice in Wonderland	how funny it'll seem to come out among the people that walk with their heads downward!
Alice in Wonderland	the antipathies, i think--' (she was rather glad there was no one listening, this time, as it didn't sound at all the right word) '--but i shall have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know.
Alice in Wonderland	please, ma'am, is this new zealand or australia?'
Alice in Wonderland	(and she tried to curtsey as she spoke--fancy curtseying as you're falling through the air!
Alice in Wonderland	do you think you could manage it?)
Alice in Wonderland	'and what an ignorant little girl she'll think me for asking!
Alice in Wonderland	no, it'll never do to ask: perhaps i shall see it written up somewhere.'
Alice in Wonderland	down, down, down.
Alice in Wonderland	there was nothing else to do, so alice soon began talking again.
Alice in Wonderland	'dinah'll miss me very much to-night, i should think!'
Alice in Wonderland	(dinah was the cat.)
Alice in Wonderland	'i hope they'll remember her saucer of milk at tea-time.
Alice in Wonderland	dinah my dear!
Alice in Wonderland	i wish you were down here with me!
Alice in Wonderland	there are no mice in the air, i'm afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that's very like a mouse, you know.
Alice in Wonderland	but do cats eat bats, i wonder?'
Alice in Wonderland	and here alice began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of way, 'do cats eat bats?
Alice in Wonderland	do cats eat bats?'
Alice in Wonderland	and sometimes, 'do bats eat cats?'
Alice in Wonderland	for, you see, as she couldn't answer either question, it didn't much matter which way she put it.
Alice in Wonderland	she felt that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand with dinah, and saying to her very earnestly, 'now, dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever eat a bat?'
Alice in Wonderland	when suddenly, thump!
Alice in Wonderland	thump!
Alice in Wonderland	down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.
Alice in Wonderland	alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment: she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another long passage, and the white rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it.
Alice in Wonderland	there was not a moment to be lost: away went alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, 'oh my ears and whiskers, how late it's getting!'
Alice in Wonderland	she was close behind it when she turned the corner, but the rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging from the roof.
Alice in Wonderland	there were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to get out again.
Alice in Wonderland	suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and alice's first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall; but, alas!
Alice in Wonderland	either the locks were too large, or the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of them.
Alice in Wonderland	however, on the second time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!
Alice in Wonderland	alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw.
Alice in Wonderland	how she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head through the doorway; 'and even if my head would go through,' thought poor alice, 'it would be of very little use without my shoulders.
Alice in Wonderland	oh, how i wish i could shut up like a telescope!
Alice in Wonderland	i think i could, if i only knew how to begin.'
Alice in Wonderland	for, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had happened lately, that alice had begun to think that very few things indeed were really impossible.
Alice in Wonderland	there seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this time she found a little bottle on it, ('which certainly was not here before,' said alice,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper label, with the words 'drink me' beautifully printed on it in large letters.
Alice in Wonderland	it was all very well to say 'drink me,' but the wise little alice was not going to do that in a hurry.
Alice in Wonderland	'no, i'll look first,' she said, 'and see whether it's marked "poison" or not'; for she had read several nice little histories about children who had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant things, all because they would not remember the simple rules their friends had taught them: such as, that a red-hot poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your finger very deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked 'poison,' it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.
Alice in Wonderland	however, this bottle was not marked 'poison,' so alice ventured to taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.
Alice in Wonderland	*    *    *    *    *    *    *  *    *    *    *    *    *  *    *    *    *    *    *    *  'what a curious feeling!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice; 'i must be shutting up like a telescope.'
Alice in Wonderland	and so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going through the little door into that lovely garden.
Alice in Wonderland	first, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further: she felt a little nervous about this; 'for it might end, you know,' said alice to herself, 'in my going out altogether, like a candle.
Alice in Wonderland	i wonder what i should be like then?'
Alice in Wonderland	and she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember ever having seen such a thing.
Alice in Wonderland	after a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going into the garden at once; but, alas for poor alice!
Alice in Wonderland	when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery; and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing sat down and cried.
Alice in Wonderland	'come, there's no use in crying like that!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice to herself, rather sharply; 'i advise you to leave off this minute!'
Alice in Wonderland	she generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people.
Alice in Wonderland	'but it's no use now,' thought poor alice, 'to pretend to be two people!
Alice in Wonderland	why, there's hardly enough of me left to make one respectable person!'
Alice in Wonderland	soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table: she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words 'eat me' were beautifully marked in currants.
Alice in Wonderland	'well, i'll eat it,' said alice, 'and if it makes me grow larger, i can reach the key; and if it makes me grow smaller, i can creep under the door; so either way i'll get into the garden, and i don't care which happens!'
Alice in Wonderland	she ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, 'which way?
Alice in Wonderland	which way?
Alice in Wonderland	', holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same size: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but alice had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the common way.
Alice in Wonderland	so she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.
Alice in Wonderland	*    *    *    *    *    *    *  *    *    *    *    *    *  *    *    *    *    *    *    *     chapter ii.
Alice in Wonderland	the pool of tears  'curiouser and curiouser!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried alice (she was so much surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good english); 'now i'm opening out like the largest telescope that ever was!
Alice in Wonderland	good-bye, feet!'
Alice in Wonderland	(for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so far off).
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, my poor little feet, i wonder who will put on your shoes and stockings for you now, dears?
Alice in Wonderland	i'm sure _i_ shan't be able!
Alice in Wonderland	i shall be a great deal too far off to trouble myself about you: you must manage the best way you can;--but i must be kind to them,' thought alice, 'or perhaps they won't walk the way i want to go!
Alice in Wonderland	let me see: i'll give them a new pair of boots every christmas.'
Alice in Wonderland	and she went on planning to herself how she would manage it.
Alice in Wonderland	'they must go by the carrier,' she thought; 'and how funny it'll seem, sending presents to one's own feet!
Alice in Wonderland	and how odd the directions will look!
Alice in Wonderland	alice's right foot, esq.
Alice in Wonderland	hearthrug, near the fender, (with alice's love).
Alice in Wonderland	oh dear, what nonsense i'm talking!'
Alice in Wonderland	just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was now more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.
Alice in Wonderland	poor alice!
Alice in Wonderland	it was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.
Alice in Wonderland	'you ought to be ashamed of yourself,' said alice, 'a great girl like you,' (she might well say this), 'to go on crying in this way!
Alice in Wonderland	stop this moment, i tell you!'
Alice in Wonderland	but she went on all the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the hall.
Alice in Wonderland	after a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming.
Alice in Wonderland	it was the white rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to himself as he came, 'oh!
Alice in Wonderland	the duchess, the duchess!
Alice in Wonderland	oh!
Alice in Wonderland	won't she be savage if i've kept her waiting!'
Alice in Wonderland	alice felt so desperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the rabbit came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, 'if you please, sir--' the rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard as he could go.
Alice in Wonderland	alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking: 'dear, dear!
Alice in Wonderland	how queer everything is to-day!
Alice in Wonderland	and yesterday things went on just as usual.
Alice in Wonderland	i wonder if i've been changed in the night?
Alice in Wonderland	let me think: was i the same when i got up this morning?
Alice in Wonderland	i almost think i can remember feeling a little different.
Alice in Wonderland	but if i'm not the same, the next question is, who in the world am i?
Alice in Wonderland	ah, that's the great puzzle!'
Alice in Wonderland	and she began thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of them.
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm sure i'm not ada,' she said, 'for her hair goes in such long ringlets, and mine doesn't go in ringlets at all; and i'm sure i can't be mabel, for i know all sorts of things, and she, oh!
Alice in Wonderland	she knows such a very little!
Alice in Wonderland	besides, she's she, and i'm i, and--oh dear, how puzzling it all is!
Alice in Wonderland	i'll try if i know all the things i used to know.
Alice in Wonderland	let me see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven is--oh dear!
Alice in Wonderland	i shall never get to twenty at that rate!
Alice in Wonderland	however, the multiplication table doesn't signify: let's try geography.
Alice in Wonderland	london is the capital of paris, and paris is the capital of rome, and rome--no, that's all wrong, i'm certain!
Alice in Wonderland	i must have been changed for mabel!
Alice in Wonderland	i'll try and say "how doth the little--"' and she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do:--  'how doth the little crocodile improve his shining tail, and pour the waters of the nile on every golden scale!
Alice in Wonderland	'how cheerfully he seems to grin, how neatly spread his claws, and welcome little fishes in with gently smiling jaws!'
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm sure those are not the right words,' said poor alice, and her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, 'i must be mabel after all, and i shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh!
Alice in Wonderland	ever so many lessons to learn!
Alice in Wonderland	no, i've made up my mind about it; if i'm mabel, i'll stay down here!
Alice in Wonderland	it'll be no use their putting their heads down and saying "come up again, dear!"
Alice in Wonderland	i shall only look up and say "who am i then?
Alice in Wonderland	tell me that first, and then, if i like being that person, i'll come up: if not, i'll stay down here till i'm somebody else"--but, oh dear!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried alice, with a sudden burst of tears, 'i do wish they would put their heads down!
Alice in Wonderland	i am so very tired of being all alone here!'
Alice in Wonderland	as she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to see that she had put on one of the rabbit's little white kid gloves while she was talking.
Alice in Wonderland	'how can i have done that?'
Alice in Wonderland	she thought.
Alice in Wonderland	'i must be growing small again.'
Alice in Wonderland	she got up and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was now about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon found out that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.
Alice in Wonderland	'that was a narrow escape!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, a good deal frightened at the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; 'and now for the garden!'
Alice in Wonderland	and she ran with all speed back to the little door: but, alas!
Alice in Wonderland	the little door was shut again, and the little golden key was lying on the glass table as before, 'and things are worse than ever,' thought the poor child, 'for i never was so small as this before, never!
Alice in Wonderland	and i declare it's too bad, that it is!'
Alice in Wonderland	as she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment, splash!
Alice in Wonderland	she was up to her chin in salt water.
Alice in Wonderland	her first idea was that she had somehow fallen into the sea, 'and in that case i can go back by railway,' she said to herself.
Alice in Wonderland	(alice had been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general conclusion, that wherever you go to on the english coast you find a number of bathing machines in the sea, some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and behind them a railway station.)
Alice in Wonderland	however, she soon made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine feet high.
Alice in Wonderland	'i wish i hadn't cried so much!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, as she swam about, trying to find her way out.
Alice in Wonderland	'i shall be punished for it now, i suppose, by being drowned in my own tears!
Alice in Wonderland	that will be a queer thing, to be sure!
Alice in Wonderland	however, everything is queer to-day.'
Alice in Wonderland	just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself.
Alice in Wonderland	'would it be of any use, now,' thought alice, 'to speak to this mouse?
Alice in Wonderland	everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that i should think very likely it can talk: at any rate, there's no harm in trying.'
Alice in Wonderland	so she began: 'o mouse, do you know the way out of this pool?
Alice in Wonderland	i am very tired of swimming about here, o mouse!'
Alice in Wonderland	(alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having seen in her brother's latin grammar, 'a mouse--of a mouse--to a mouse--a mouse--o mouse!')
Alice in Wonderland	the mouse looked at her rather inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes, but it said nothing.
Alice in Wonderland	'perhaps it doesn't understand english,' thought alice; 'i daresay it's a french mouse, come over with william the conqueror.'
Alice in Wonderland	(for, with all her knowledge of history, alice had no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.)
Alice in Wonderland	so she began again: 'ou est ma chatte?'
Alice in Wonderland	which was the first sentence in her french lesson-book.
Alice in Wonderland	the mouse gave a sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, i beg your pardon!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the poor animal's feelings.
Alice in Wonderland	'i quite forgot you didn't like cats.'
Alice in Wonderland	'not like cats!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried the mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice.
Alice in Wonderland	'would you like cats if you were me?'
Alice in Wonderland	'well, perhaps not,' said alice in a soothing tone: 'don't be angry about it.
Alice in Wonderland	and yet i wish i could show you our cat dinah: i think you'd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her.
Alice in Wonderland	she is such a dear quiet thing,' alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about in the pool, 'and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her face--and she is such a nice soft thing to nurse--and she's such a capital one for catching mice--oh, i beg your pardon!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried alice again, for this time the mouse was bristling all over, and she felt certain it must be really offended.
Alice in Wonderland	'we won't talk about her any more if you'd rather not.'
Alice in Wonderland	'we indeed!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried the mouse, who was trembling down to the end of his tail.
Alice in Wonderland	'as if i would talk on such a subject!
Alice in Wonderland	our family always hated cats: nasty, low, vulgar things!
Alice in Wonderland	don't let me hear the name again!'
Alice in Wonderland	'i won't indeed!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, in a great hurry to change the subject of conversation.
Alice in Wonderland	'are you--are you fond--of--of dogs?'
Alice in Wonderland	the mouse did not answer, so alice went on eagerly: 'there is such a nice little dog near our house i should like to show you!
Alice in Wonderland	a little bright-eyed terrier, you know, with oh, such long curly brown hair!
Alice in Wonderland	and it'll fetch things when you throw them, and it'll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of things--i can't remember half of them--and it belongs to a farmer, you know, and he says it's so useful, it's worth a hundred pounds!
Alice in Wonderland	he says it kills all the rats and--oh dear!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried alice in a sorrowful tone, 'i'm afraid i've offended it again!'
Alice in Wonderland	for the mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion in the pool as it went.
Alice in Wonderland	so she called softly after it, 'mouse dear!
Alice in Wonderland	do come back again, and we won't talk about cats or dogs either, if you don't like them!'
Alice in Wonderland	when the mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its face was quite pale (with passion, alice thought), and it said in a low trembling voice, 'let us get to the shore, and then i'll tell you my history, and you'll understand why it is i hate cats and dogs.'
Alice in Wonderland	it was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with the birds and animals that had fallen into it: there were a duck and a dodo, a lory and an eaglet, and several other curious creatures.
Alice in Wonderland	alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the shore.
Alice in Wonderland	chapter iii.
Alice in Wonderland	a caucus-race and a long tale  they were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the bank--the birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable.
Alice in Wonderland	the first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite natural to alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if she had known them all her life.
Alice in Wonderland	indeed, she had quite a long argument with the lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, 'i am older than you, and must know better'; and this alice would not allow without knowing how old it was, and, as the lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no more to be said.
Alice in Wonderland	at last the mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among them, called out, 'sit down, all of you, and listen to me!
Alice in Wonderland	i'll soon make you dry enough!'
Alice in Wonderland	they all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the mouse in the middle.
Alice in Wonderland	alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.
Alice in Wonderland	'ahem!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the mouse with an important air, 'are you all ready?
Alice in Wonderland	this is the driest thing i know.
Alice in Wonderland	silence all round, if you please!
Alice in Wonderland	"william the conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was soon submitted to by the english, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much accustomed to usurpation and conquest.
Alice in Wonderland	edwin and morcar, the earls of mercia and northumbria--"'  'ugh!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the lory, with a shiver.
Alice in Wonderland	'i beg your pardon!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the mouse, frowning, but very politely: 'did you speak?'
Alice in Wonderland	'not i!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the lory hastily.
Alice in Wonderland	'i thought you did,' said the mouse. '
Alice in Wonderland	--i proceed.
Alice in Wonderland	"edwin and morcar, the earls of mercia and northumbria, declared for him: and even stigand, the patriotic archbishop of canterbury, found it advisable--"'  'found what?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the duck.
Alice in Wonderland	'found it,' the mouse replied rather crossly: 'of course you know what "it" means.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i know what "it" means well enough, when i find a thing,' said the duck: 'it's generally a frog or a worm.
Alice in Wonderland	the question is, what did the archbishop find?'
Alice in Wonderland	the mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, '"--found it advisable to go with edgar atheling to meet william and offer him the crown.
Alice in Wonderland	william's conduct at first was moderate.
Alice in Wonderland	but the insolence of his normans--" how are you getting on now, my dear?'
Alice in Wonderland	it continued, turning to alice as it spoke.
Alice in Wonderland	'as wet as ever,' said alice in a melancholy tone: 'it doesn't seem to dry me at all.'
Alice in Wonderland	'in that case,' said the dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, 'i move that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more energetic remedies--'  'speak english!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the eaglet.
Alice in Wonderland	'i don't know the meaning of half those long words, and, what's more, i don't believe you do either!'
Alice in Wonderland	and the eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the other birds tittered audibly.
Alice in Wonderland	'what i was going to say,' said the dodo in an offended tone, 'was, that the best thing to get us dry would be a caucus-race.'
Alice in Wonderland	'what is a caucus-race?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice; not that she wanted much to know, but the dodo had paused as if it thought that somebody ought to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.
Alice in Wonderland	'why,' said the dodo, 'the best way to explain it is to do it.'
Alice in Wonderland	(and, as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter day, i will tell you how the dodo managed it.)
Alice in Wonderland	first it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, ('the exact shape doesn't matter,' it said,) and then all the party were placed along the course, here and there.
Alice in Wonderland	there was no 'one, two, three, and away,' but they began running when they liked, and left off when they liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over.
Alice in Wonderland	however, when they had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the dodo suddenly called out 'the race is over!'
Alice in Wonderland	and they all crowded round it, panting, and asking, 'but who has won?'
Alice in Wonderland	this question the dodo could not answer without a great deal of thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon its forehead (the position in which you usually see shakespeare, in the pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence.
Alice in Wonderland	at last the dodo said, 'everybody has won, and all must have prizes.'
Alice in Wonderland	'but who is to give the prizes?'
Alice in Wonderland	quite a chorus of voices asked.
Alice in Wonderland	'why, she, of course,' said the dodo, pointing to alice with one finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a confused way, 'prizes!
Alice in Wonderland	prizes!'
Alice in Wonderland	alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt water had not got into it), and handed them round as prizes.
Alice in Wonderland	there was exactly one a-piece all round.
Alice in Wonderland	'but she must have a prize herself, you know,' said the mouse.
Alice in Wonderland	'of course,' the dodo replied very gravely.
Alice in Wonderland	'what else have you got in your pocket?'
Alice in Wonderland	he went on, turning to alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'only a thimble,' said alice sadly.
Alice in Wonderland	'hand it over here,' said the dodo.
Alice in Wonderland	then they all crowded round her once more, while the dodo solemnly presented the thimble, saying 'we beg your acceptance of this elegant thimble'; and, when it had finished this short speech, they all cheered.
Alice in Wonderland	alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so grave that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as she could.
Alice in Wonderland	the next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise and confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not taste theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back.
Alice in Wonderland	however, it was over at last, and they sat down again in a ring, and begged the mouse to tell them something more.
Alice in Wonderland	'you promised to tell me your history, you know,' said alice, 'and why it is you hate--c and d,' she added in a whisper, half afraid that it would be offended again.
Alice in Wonderland	'mine is a long and a sad tale!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the mouse, turning to alice, and sighing.
Alice in Wonderland	'it is a long tail, certainly,' said alice, looking down with wonder at the mouse's tail; 'but why do you call it sad?'
Alice in Wonderland	and she kept on puzzling about it while the mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the tale was something like this:--  'fury said to a mouse, that he met in the house, "let us both go to law: i will prosecute you.--come, i'll take no denial; we must have a trial: for really this morning i've nothing to do."
Alice in Wonderland	said the mouse to the cur, "such a trial, dear sir, with no jury or judge, would be wasting our breath."
Alice in Wonderland	"i'll be judge, i'll be jury," said cunning old fury: "i'll try the whole cause, and condemn you to death."'
Alice in Wonderland	'you are not attending!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the mouse to alice severely.
Alice in Wonderland	'what are you thinking of?'
Alice in Wonderland	'i beg your pardon,' said alice very humbly: 'you had got to the fifth bend, i think?'
Alice in Wonderland	'i had not!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried the mouse, sharply and very angrily.
Alice in Wonderland	'a knot!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, always ready to make herself useful, and looking anxiously about her.
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, do let me help to undo it!'
Alice in Wonderland	'i shall do nothing of the sort,' said the mouse, getting up and walking away.
Alice in Wonderland	'you insult me by talking such nonsense!'
Alice in Wonderland	'i didn't mean it!'
Alice in Wonderland	pleaded poor alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'but you're so easily offended, you know!'
Alice in Wonderland	the mouse only growled in reply.
Alice in Wonderland	'please come back and finish your story!'
Alice in Wonderland	alice called after it; and the others all joined in chorus, 'yes, please do!'
Alice in Wonderland	but the mouse only shook its head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.
Alice in Wonderland	'what a pity it wouldn't stay!'
Alice in Wonderland	sighed the lory, as soon as it was quite out of sight; and an old crab took the opportunity of saying to her daughter 'ah, my dear!
Alice in Wonderland	let this be a lesson to you never to lose your temper!'
Alice in Wonderland	'hold your tongue, ma!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the young crab, a little snappishly.
Alice in Wonderland	'you're enough to try the patience of an oyster!'
Alice in Wonderland	'i wish i had our dinah here, i know i do!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice aloud, addressing nobody in particular.
Alice in Wonderland	'she'd soon fetch it back!'
Alice in Wonderland	'and who is dinah, if i might venture to ask the question?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the lory.
Alice in Wonderland	alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet: 'dinah's our cat.
Alice in Wonderland	and she's such a capital one for catching mice you can't think!
Alice in Wonderland	and oh, i wish you could see her after the birds!
Alice in Wonderland	why, she'll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!'
Alice in Wonderland	this speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party.
Alice in Wonderland	some of the birds hurried off at once: one old magpie began wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking, 'i really must be getting home; the night-air doesn't suit my throat!'
Alice in Wonderland	and a canary called out in a trembling voice to its children, 'come away, my dears!
Alice in Wonderland	it's high time you were all in bed!'
Alice in Wonderland	on various pretexts they all moved off, and alice was soon left alone.
Alice in Wonderland	'i wish i hadn't mentioned dinah!'
Alice in Wonderland	she said to herself in a melancholy tone.
Alice in Wonderland	'nobody seems to like her, down here, and i'm sure she's the best cat in the world!
Alice in Wonderland	oh, my dear dinah!
Alice in Wonderland	i wonder if i shall ever see you any more!'
Alice in Wonderland	and here poor alice began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and low-spirited.
Alice in Wonderland	in a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping that the mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to finish his story.
Alice in Wonderland	chapter iv.
Alice in Wonderland	the rabbit sends in a little bill  it was the white rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she heard it muttering to itself 'the duchess!
Alice in Wonderland	the duchess!
Alice in Wonderland	oh my dear paws!
Alice in Wonderland	oh my fur and whiskers!
Alice in Wonderland	she'll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are ferrets!
Alice in Wonderland	where can i have dropped them, i wonder?'
Alice in Wonderland	alice guessed in a moment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves, and she very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but they were nowhere to be seen--everything seemed to have changed since her swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the little door, had vanished completely.
Alice in Wonderland	very soon the rabbit noticed alice, as she went hunting about, and called out to her in an angry tone, 'why, mary ann, what are you doing out here?
Alice in Wonderland	run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan!
Alice in Wonderland	quick, now!'
Alice in Wonderland	and alice was so much frightened that she ran off at once in the direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the mistake it had made.
Alice in Wonderland	'he took me for his housemaid,' she said to herself as she ran.
Alice in Wonderland	'how surprised he'll be when he finds out who i am!
Alice in Wonderland	but i'd better take him his fan and gloves--that is, if i can find them.'
Alice in Wonderland	as she said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass plate with the name 'w.
Alice in Wonderland	rabbit' engraved upon it.
Alice in Wonderland	she went in without knocking, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the real mary ann, and be turned out of the house before she had found the fan and gloves.
Alice in Wonderland	'how queer it seems,' alice said to herself, 'to be going messages for a rabbit!
Alice in Wonderland	i suppose dinah'll be sending me on messages next!'
Alice in Wonderland	and she began fancying the sort of thing that would happen: '"miss alice!
Alice in Wonderland	come here directly, and get ready for your walk!"
Alice in Wonderland	"coming in a minute, nurse!
Alice in Wonderland	but i've got to see that the mouse doesn't get out."
Alice in Wonderland	only i don't think,' alice went on, 'that they'd let dinah stop in the house if it began ordering people about like that!'
Alice in Wonderland	by this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pairs of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a little bottle that stood near the looking-glass.
Alice in Wonderland	there was no label this time with the words 'drink me,' but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips.
Alice in Wonderland	'i know something interesting is sure to happen,' she said to herself, 'whenever i eat or drink anything; so i'll just see what this bottle does.
Alice in Wonderland	i do hope it'll make me grow large again, for really i'm quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!'
Alice in Wonderland	it did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being broken.
Alice in Wonderland	she hastily put down the bottle, saying to herself 'that's quite enough--i hope i shan't grow any more--as it is, i can't get out at the door--i do wish i hadn't drunk quite so much!'
Alice in Wonderland	alas!
Alice in Wonderland	it was too late to wish that!
Alice in Wonderland	she went on growing, and growing, and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in another minute there was not even room for this, and she tried the effect of lying down with one elbow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head.
Alice in Wonderland	still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one foot up the chimney, and said to herself 'now i can do no more, whatever happens.
Alice in Wonderland	what will become of me?'
Alice in Wonderland	luckily for alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect, and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy.
Alice in Wonderland	'it was much pleasanter at home,' thought poor alice, 'when one wasn't always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice and rabbits.
Alice in Wonderland	i almost wish i hadn't gone down that rabbit-hole--and yet--and yet--it's rather curious, you know, this sort of life!
Alice in Wonderland	i do wonder what can have happened to me!
Alice in Wonderland	when i used to read fairy-tales, i fancied that kind of thing never happened, and now here i am in the middle of one!
Alice in Wonderland	there ought to be a book written about me, that there ought!
Alice in Wonderland	and when i grow up, i'll write one--but i'm grown up now,' she added in a sorrowful tone; 'at least there's no room to grow up any more here.'
Alice in Wonderland	'but then,' thought alice, 'shall i never get any older than i am now?
Alice in Wonderland	that'll be a comfort, one way--never to be an old woman--but then--always to have lessons to learn!
Alice in Wonderland	oh, i shouldn't like that!'
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, you foolish alice!'
Alice in Wonderland	she answered herself.
Alice in Wonderland	'how can you learn lessons in here?
Alice in Wonderland	why, there's hardly room for you, and no room at all for any lesson-books!'
Alice in Wonderland	and so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and making quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.
Alice in Wonderland	'mary ann!
Alice in Wonderland	mary ann!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the voice.
Alice in Wonderland	'fetch me my gloves this moment!'
Alice in Wonderland	then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs.
Alice in Wonderland	alice knew it was the rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as large as the rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.
Alice in Wonderland	presently the rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but, as the door opened inwards, and alice's elbow was pressed hard against it, that attempt proved a failure.
Alice in Wonderland	alice heard it say to itself 'then i'll go round and get in at the window.'
Alice in Wonderland	'that you won't' thought alice, and, after waiting till she fancied she heard the rabbit just under the window, she suddenly spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air.
Alice in Wonderland	she did not get hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass, from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into a cucumber-frame, or something of the sort.
Alice in Wonderland	next came an angry voice--the rabbit's--'pat!
Alice in Wonderland	pat!
Alice in Wonderland	where are you?'
Alice in Wonderland	and then a voice she had never heard before, 'sure then i'm here!
Alice in Wonderland	digging for apples, yer honour!'
Alice in Wonderland	'digging for apples, indeed!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the rabbit angrily.
Alice in Wonderland	'here!
Alice in Wonderland	come and help me out of this!'
Alice in Wonderland	(sounds of more broken glass.)
Alice in Wonderland	'now tell me, pat, what's that in the window?'
Alice in Wonderland	'sure, it's an arm, yer honour!'
Alice in Wonderland	(he pronounced it 'arrum.')
Alice in Wonderland	'an arm, you goose!
Alice in Wonderland	who ever saw one that size?
Alice in Wonderland	why, it fills the whole window!'
Alice in Wonderland	'sure, it does, yer honour: but it's an arm for all that.'
Alice in Wonderland	'well, it's got no business there, at any rate: go and take it away!'
Alice in Wonderland	there was a long silence after this, and alice could only hear whispers now and then; such as, 'sure, i don't like it, yer honour, at all, at all!'
Alice in Wonderland	'do as i tell you, you coward!'
Alice in Wonderland	and at last she spread out her hand again, and made another snatch in the air.
Alice in Wonderland	this time there were two little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass.
Alice in Wonderland	'what a number of cucumber-frames there must be!'
Alice in Wonderland	thought alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'i wonder what they'll do next!
Alice in Wonderland	as for pulling me out of the window, i only wish they could!
Alice in Wonderland	i'm sure i don't want to stay in here any longer!'
Alice in Wonderland	she waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came a rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a good many voices all talking together: she made out the words: 'where's the other ladder?--why, i hadn't to bring but one; bill's got the other--bill!
Alice in Wonderland	fetch it here, lad!--here, put 'em up at this corner--no, tie 'em together first--they don't reach half high enough yet--oh!
Alice in Wonderland	they'll do well enough; don't be particular--here, bill!
Alice in Wonderland	catch hold of this rope--will the roof bear?--mind that loose slate--oh, it's coming down!
Alice in Wonderland	heads below!'
Alice in Wonderland	(a loud crash)--'now, who did that?--it was bill, i fancy--who's to go down the chimney?--nay, i shan't!
Alice in Wonderland	you do it!--that i won't, then!--bill's to go down--here, bill!
Alice in Wonderland	the master says you're to go down the chimney!'
Alice in Wonderland	'oh!
Alice in Wonderland	so bill's got to come down the chimney, has he?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice to herself.
Alice in Wonderland	'shy, they seem to put everything upon bill!
Alice in Wonderland	i wouldn't be in bill's place for a good deal: this fireplace is narrow, to be sure; but i think i can kick a little!'
Alice in Wonderland	she drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and waited till she heard a little animal (she couldn't guess of what sort it was) scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close above her: then, saying to herself 'this is bill,' she gave one sharp kick, and waited to see what would happen next.
Alice in Wonderland	the first thing she heard was a general chorus of 'there goes bill!'
Alice in Wonderland	then the rabbit's voice along--'catch him, you by the hedge!'
Alice in Wonderland	then silence, and then another confusion of voices--'hold up his head--brandy now--don't choke him--how was it, old fellow?
Alice in Wonderland	what happened to you?
Alice in Wonderland	tell us all about it!'
Alice in Wonderland	last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, ('that's bill,' thought alice,) 'well, i hardly know--no more, thank ye; i'm better now--but i'm a deal too flustered to tell you--all i know is, something comes at me like a jack-in-the-box, and up i goes like a sky-rocket!'
Alice in Wonderland	'so you did, old fellow!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the others.
Alice in Wonderland	'we must burn the house down!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the rabbit's voice; and alice called out as loud as she could, 'if you do.
Alice in Wonderland	i'll set dinah at you!'
Alice in Wonderland	there was a dead silence instantly, and alice thought to herself, 'i wonder what they will do next!
Alice in Wonderland	if they had any sense, they'd take the roof off.'
Alice in Wonderland	after a minute or two, they began moving about again, and alice heard the rabbit say, 'a barrowful will do, to begin with.'
Alice in Wonderland	'a barrowful of what?'
Alice in Wonderland	thought alice; but she had not long to doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face.
Alice in Wonderland	'i'll put a stop to this,' she said to herself, and shouted out, 'you'd better not do that again!'
Alice in Wonderland	which produced another dead silence.
Alice in Wonderland	alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her head.
Alice in Wonderland	'if i eat one of these cakes,' she thought, 'it's sure to make some change in my size; and as it can't possibly make me larger, it must make me smaller, i suppose.'
Alice in Wonderland	so she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that she began shrinking directly.
Alice in Wonderland	as soon as she was small enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside.
Alice in Wonderland	the poor little lizard, bill, was in the middle, being held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giving it something out of a bottle.
Alice in Wonderland	they all made a rush at alice the moment she appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a thick wood.
Alice in Wonderland	'the first thing i've got to do,' said alice to herself, as she wandered about in the wood, 'is to grow to my right size again; and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden.
Alice in Wonderland	i think that will be the best plan.'
Alice in Wonderland	it sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the smallest idea how to set about it; and while she was peering about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a great hurry.
Alice in Wonderland	an enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her.
Alice in Wonderland	'poor little thing!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to it; but she was terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing.
Alice in Wonderland	hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick, and made believe to worry it; then alice dodged behind a great thistle, to keep herself from being run over; and the moment she appeared on the other side, the puppy made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in its hurry to get hold of it; then alice, thinking it was very like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle again; then the puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, running a very little way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, with its tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.
Alice in Wonderland	this seemed to alice a good opportunity for making her escape; so she set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath, and till the puppy's bark sounded quite faint in the distance.
Alice in Wonderland	'and yet what a dear little puppy it was!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, as she leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the leaves: 'i should have liked teaching it tricks very much, if--if i'd only been the right size to do it!
Alice in Wonderland	oh dear!
Alice in Wonderland	i'd nearly forgotten that i've got to grow up again!
Alice in Wonderland	let me see--how is it to be managed?
Alice in Wonderland	i suppose i ought to eat or drink something or other; but the great question is, what?'
Alice in Wonderland	the great question certainly was, what?
Alice in Wonderland	alice looked all round her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see anything that looked like the right thing to eat or drink under the circumstances.
Alice in Wonderland	there was a large mushroom growing near her, about the same height as herself; and when she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, and behind it, it occurred to her that she might as well look and see what was on the top of it.
Alice in Wonderland	she stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of the mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, quietly smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice of her or of anything else.
Alice in Wonderland	chapter v. advice from a caterpillar  the caterpillar and alice looked at each other for some time in silence: at last the caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.
Alice in Wonderland	'who are you?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the caterpillar.
Alice in Wonderland	this was not an encouraging opening for a conversation.
Alice in Wonderland	alice replied, rather shyly, 'i--i hardly know, sir, just at present--at least i know who i was when i got up this morning, but i think i must have been changed several times since then.'
Alice in Wonderland	'what do you mean by that?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the caterpillar sternly.
Alice in Wonderland	'explain yourself!'
Alice in Wonderland	'i can't explain myself, i'm afraid, sir' said alice, 'because i'm not myself, you see.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i don't see,' said the caterpillar.
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm afraid i can't put it more clearly,' alice replied very politely, 'for i can't understand it myself to begin with; and being so many different sizes in a day is very confusing.'
Alice in Wonderland	'it isn't,' said the caterpillar.
Alice in Wonderland	'well, perhaps you haven't found it so yet,' said alice; 'but when you have to turn into a chrysalis--you will some day, you know--and then after that into a butterfly, i should think you'll feel it a little queer, won't you?'
Alice in Wonderland	'not a bit,' said the caterpillar.
Alice in Wonderland	'well, perhaps your feelings may be different,' said alice; 'all i know is, it would feel very queer to me.'
Alice in Wonderland	'you!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the caterpillar contemptuously.
Alice in Wonderland	'who are you?'
Alice in Wonderland	which brought them back again to the beginning of the conversation.
Alice in Wonderland	alice felt a little irritated at the caterpillar's making such very short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, 'i think, you ought to tell me who you are, first.'
Alice in Wonderland	'why?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the caterpillar.
Alice in Wonderland	here was another puzzling question; and as alice could not think of any good reason, and as the caterpillar seemed to be in a very unpleasant state of mind, she turned away.
Alice in Wonderland	'come back!'
Alice in Wonderland	the caterpillar called after her.
Alice in Wonderland	'i've something important to say!'
Alice in Wonderland	this sounded promising, certainly: alice turned and came back again.
Alice in Wonderland	'keep your temper,' said the caterpillar.
Alice in Wonderland	'is that all?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, swallowing down her anger as well as she could.
Alice in Wonderland	'no,' said the caterpillar.
Alice in Wonderland	alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do, and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing.
Alice in Wonderland	for some minutes it puffed away without speaking, but at last it unfolded its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said, 'so you think you're changed, do you?'
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm afraid i am, sir,' said alice; 'i can't remember things as i used--and i don't keep the same size for ten minutes together!'
Alice in Wonderland	'can't remember what things?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the caterpillar.
Alice in Wonderland	'well, i've tried to say "how doth the little busy bee," but it all came different!'
Alice in Wonderland	alice replied in a very melancholy voice.
Alice in Wonderland	'repeat, "you are old, father william,"' said the caterpillar.
Alice in Wonderland	alice folded her hands, and began:--  'you are old, father william,' the young man said, 'and your hair has become very white; and yet you incessantly stand on your head-- do you think, at your age, it is right?'
Alice in Wonderland	'in my youth,' father william replied to his son, 'i feared it might injure the brain; but, now that i'm perfectly sure i have none, why, i do it again and again.'
Alice in Wonderland	'you are old,' said the youth, 'as i mentioned before, and have grown most uncommonly fat; yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door-- pray, what is the reason of that?'
Alice in Wonderland	'in my youth,' said the sage, as he shook his grey locks, 'i kept all my limbs very supple by the use of this ointment--one shilling the box-- allow me to sell you a couple?'
Alice in Wonderland	'you are old,' said the youth, 'and your jaws are too weak for anything tougher than suet; yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak-- pray how did you manage to do it?'
Alice in Wonderland	'in my youth,' said his father, 'i took to the law, and argued each case with my wife; and the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw, has lasted the rest of my life.'
Alice in Wonderland	'you are old,' said the youth, 'one would hardly suppose that your eye was as steady as ever; yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose-- what made you so awfully clever?'
Alice in Wonderland	'i have answered three questions, and that is enough,' said his father; 'don't give yourself airs!
Alice in Wonderland	do you think i can listen all day to such stuff?
Alice in Wonderland	be off, or i'll kick you down stairs!'
Alice in Wonderland	'that is not said right,' said the caterpillar.
Alice in Wonderland	'not quite right, i'm afraid,' said alice, timidly; 'some of the words have got altered.'
Alice in Wonderland	'it is wrong from beginning to end,' said the caterpillar decidedly, and there was silence for some minutes.
Alice in Wonderland	the caterpillar was the first to speak.
Alice in Wonderland	'what size do you want to be?'
Alice in Wonderland	it asked.
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, i'm not particular as to size,' alice hastily replied; 'only one doesn't like changing so often, you know.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i don't know,' said the caterpillar.
Alice in Wonderland	alice said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in her life before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.
Alice in Wonderland	'are you content now?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the caterpillar.
Alice in Wonderland	'well, i should like to be a little larger, sir, if you wouldn't mind,' said alice: 'three inches is such a wretched height to be.'
Alice in Wonderland	'it is a very good height indeed!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the caterpillar angrily, rearing itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three inches high).
Alice in Wonderland	'but i'm not used to it!'
Alice in Wonderland	pleaded poor alice in a piteous tone.
Alice in Wonderland	and she thought of herself, 'i wish the creatures wouldn't be so easily offended!'
Alice in Wonderland	'you'll get used to it in time,' said the caterpillar; and it put the hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.
Alice in Wonderland	this time alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again.
Alice in Wonderland	in a minute or two the caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth and yawned once or twice, and shook itself.
Alice in Wonderland	then it got down off the mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely remarking as it went, 'one side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you grow shorter.'
Alice in Wonderland	'one side of what?
Alice in Wonderland	the other side of what?'
Alice in Wonderland	thought alice to herself.
Alice in Wonderland	'of the mushroom,' said the caterpillar, just as if she had asked it aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.
Alice in Wonderland	alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute, trying to make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was perfectly round, she found this a very difficult question.
Alice in Wonderland	however, at last she stretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke off a bit of the edge with each hand.
Alice in Wonderland	'and now which is which?'
Alice in Wonderland	she said to herself, and nibbled a little of the right-hand bit to try the effect: the next moment she felt a violent blow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot!
Alice in Wonderland	she was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she felt that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so she set to work at once to eat some of the other bit.
Alice in Wonderland	her chin was pressed so closely against her foot, that there was hardly room to open her mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of the lefthand bit.
Alice in Wonderland	*    *    *    *    *    *    *  *    *    *    *    *    *  *    *    *    *    *    *    *  'come, my head's free at last!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice in a tone of delight, which changed into alarm in another moment, when she found that her shoulders were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a sea of green leaves that lay far below her.
Alice in Wonderland	'what can all that green stuff be?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'and where have my shoulders got to?
Alice in Wonderland	and oh, my poor hands, how is it i can't see you?'
Alice in Wonderland	she was moving them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow, except a little shaking among the distant green leaves.
Alice in Wonderland	as there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head, she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted to find that her neck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent.
Alice in Wonderland	she had just succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was going to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be nothing but the tops of the trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made her draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her face, and was beating her violently with its wings.
Alice in Wonderland	'serpent!'
Alice in Wonderland	screamed the pigeon.
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm not a serpent!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice indignantly.
Alice in Wonderland	'let me alone!'
Alice in Wonderland	'serpent, i say again!'
Alice in Wonderland	repeated the pigeon, but in a more subdued tone, and added with a kind of sob, 'i've tried every way, and nothing seems to suit them!'
Alice in Wonderland	'i haven't the least idea what you're talking about,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'i've tried the roots of trees, and i've tried banks, and i've tried hedges,' the pigeon went on, without attending to her; 'but those serpents!
Alice in Wonderland	there's no pleasing them!'
Alice in Wonderland	alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use in saying anything more till the pigeon had finished.
Alice in Wonderland	'as if it wasn't trouble enough hatching the eggs,' said the pigeon; 'but i must be on the look-out for serpents night and day!
Alice in Wonderland	why, i haven't had a wink of sleep these three weeks!'
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm very sorry you've been annoyed,' said alice, who was beginning to see its meaning.
Alice in Wonderland	'and just as i'd taken the highest tree in the wood,' continued the pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, 'and just as i was thinking i should be free of them at last, they must needs come wriggling down from the sky!
Alice in Wonderland	ugh, serpent!'
Alice in Wonderland	'but i'm not a serpent, i tell you!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm a--i'm a--'  'well!
Alice in Wonderland	what are you?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the pigeon.
Alice in Wonderland	'i can see you're trying to invent something!'
Alice in Wonderland	'i--i'm a little girl,' said alice, rather doubtfully, as she remembered the number of changes she had gone through that day.
Alice in Wonderland	'a likely story indeed!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the pigeon in a tone of the deepest contempt.
Alice in Wonderland	'i've seen a good many little girls in my time, but never one with such a neck as that!
Alice in Wonderland	no, no!
Alice in Wonderland	you're a serpent; and there's no use denying it.
Alice in Wonderland	i suppose you'll be telling me next that you never tasted an egg!'
Alice in Wonderland	'i have tasted eggs, certainly,' said alice, who was a very truthful child; 'but little girls eat eggs quite as much as serpents do, you know.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i don't believe it,' said the pigeon; 'but if they do, why then they're a kind of serpent, that's all i can say.'
Alice in Wonderland	this was such a new idea to alice, that she was quite silent for a minute or two, which gave the pigeon the opportunity of adding, 'you're looking for eggs, i know that well enough; and what does it matter to me whether you're a little girl or a serpent?'
Alice in Wonderland	'it matters a good deal to me,' said alice hastily; 'but i'm not looking for eggs, as it happens; and if i was, i shouldn't want yours: i don't like them raw.'
Alice in Wonderland	'well, be off, then!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settled down again into its nest.
Alice in Wonderland	alice crouched down among the trees as well as she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches, and every now and then she had to stop and untwist it.
Alice in Wonderland	after a while she remembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands, and she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.
Alice in Wonderland	it was so long since she had been anything near the right size, that it felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes, and began talking to herself, as usual.
Alice in Wonderland	'come, there's half my plan done now!
Alice in Wonderland	how puzzling all these changes are!
Alice in Wonderland	i'm never sure what i'm going to be, from one minute to another!
Alice in Wonderland	however, i've got back to my right size: the next thing is, to get into that beautiful garden--how is that to be done, i wonder?'
Alice in Wonderland	as she said this, she came suddenly upon an open place, with a little house in it about four feet high.
Alice in Wonderland	'whoever lives there,' thought alice, 'it'll never do to come upon them this size: why, i should frighten them out of their wits!'
Alice in Wonderland	so she began nibbling at the righthand bit again, and did not venture to go near the house till she had brought herself down to nine inches high.
Alice in Wonderland	chapter vi.
Alice in Wonderland	pig and pepper  for a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and wondering what to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came running out of the wood--(she considered him to be a footman because he was in livery: otherwise, judging by his face only, she would have called him a fish)--and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles.
Alice in Wonderland	it was opened by another footman in livery, with a round face, and large eyes like a frog; and both footmen, alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled all over their heads.
Alice in Wonderland	she felt very curious to know what it was all about, and crept a little way out of the wood to listen.
Alice in Wonderland	the fish-footman began by producing from under his arm a great letter, nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to the other, saying, in a solemn tone, 'for the duchess.
Alice in Wonderland	an invitation from the queen to play croquet.'
Alice in Wonderland	the frog-footman repeated, in the same solemn tone, only changing the order of the words a little, 'from the queen.
Alice in Wonderland	an invitation for the duchess to play croquet.'
Alice in Wonderland	then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled together.
Alice in Wonderland	alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into the wood for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped out the fish-footman was gone, and the other was sitting on the ground near the door, staring stupidly up into the sky.
Alice in Wonderland	alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked.
Alice in Wonderland	'there's no sort of use in knocking,' said the footman, 'and that for two reasons.
Alice in Wonderland	first, because i'm on the same side of the door as you are; secondly, because they're making such a noise inside, no one could possibly hear you.'
Alice in Wonderland	and certainly there was a most extraordinary noise going on within--a constant howling and sneezing, and every now and then a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to pieces.
Alice in Wonderland	'please, then,' said alice, 'how am i to get in?'
Alice in Wonderland	'there might be some sense in your knocking,' the footman went on without attending to her, 'if we had the door between us.
Alice in Wonderland	for instance, if you were inside, you might knock, and i could let you out, you know.'
Alice in Wonderland	he was looking up into the sky all the time he was speaking, and this alice thought decidedly uncivil.
Alice in Wonderland	'but perhaps he can't help it,' she said to herself; 'his eyes are so very nearly at the top of his head.
Alice in Wonderland	but at any rate he might answer questions.--how am i to get in?'
Alice in Wonderland	she repeated, aloud.
Alice in Wonderland	'i shall sit here,' the footman remarked, 'till tomorrow--'  at this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came skimming out, straight at the footman's head: it just grazed his nose, and broke to pieces against one of the trees behind him.  '
Alice in Wonderland	--or next day, maybe,' the footman continued in the same tone, exactly as if nothing had happened.
Alice in Wonderland	'how am i to get in?'
Alice in Wonderland	asked alice again, in a louder tone.
Alice in Wonderland	'are you to get in at all?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the footman.
Alice in Wonderland	'that's the first question, you know.'
Alice in Wonderland	it was, no doubt: only alice did not like to be told so.
Alice in Wonderland	'it's really dreadful,' she muttered to herself, 'the way all the creatures argue.
Alice in Wonderland	it's enough to drive one crazy!'
Alice in Wonderland	the footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for repeating his remark, with variations.
Alice in Wonderland	'i shall sit here,' he said, 'on and off, for days and days.'
Alice in Wonderland	'but what am i to do?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'anything you like,' said the footman, and began whistling.
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, there's no use in talking to him,' said alice desperately: 'he's perfectly idiotic!'
Alice in Wonderland	and she opened the door and went in.
Alice in Wonderland	the door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke from one end to the other: the duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool in the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was leaning over the fire, stirring a large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.
Alice in Wonderland	'there's certainly too much pepper in that soup!'
Alice in Wonderland	alice said to herself, as well as she could for sneezing.
Alice in Wonderland	there was certainly too much of it in the air.
Alice in Wonderland	even the duchess sneezed occasionally; and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howling alternately without a moment's pause.
Alice in Wonderland	the only things in the kitchen that did not sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting on the hearth and grinning from ear to ear.
Alice in Wonderland	'please would you tell me,' said alice, a little timidly, for she was not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, 'why your cat grins like that?'
Alice in Wonderland	'it's a cheshire cat,' said the duchess, 'and that's why.
Alice in Wonderland	pig!'
Alice in Wonderland	she said the last word with such sudden violence that alice quite jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again:--  'i didn't know that cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, i didn't know that cats could grin.'
Alice in Wonderland	'they all can,' said the duchess; 'and most of 'em do.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i don't know of any that do,' alice said very politely, feeling quite pleased to have got into a conversation.
Alice in Wonderland	'you don't know much,' said the duchess; 'and that's a fact.'
Alice in Wonderland	alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought it would be as well to introduce some other subject of conversation.
Alice in Wonderland	while she was trying to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at the duchess and the baby--the fire-irons came first; then followed a shower of saucepans, plates, and dishes.
Alice in Wonderland	the duchess took no notice of them even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already, that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, please mind what you're doing!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried alice, jumping up and down in an agony of terror.
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, there goes his precious nose'; as an unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it off.
Alice in Wonderland	'if everybody minded their own business,' the duchess said in a hoarse growl, 'the world would go round a deal faster than it does.'
Alice in Wonderland	'which would not be an advantage,' said alice, who felt very glad to get an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge.
Alice in Wonderland	'just think of what work it would make with the day and night!
Alice in Wonderland	you see the earth takes twenty-four hours to turn round on its axis--'  'talking of axes,' said the duchess, 'chop off her head!'
Alice in Wonderland	alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to be listening, so she went on again: 'twenty-four hours, i think; or is it twelve?
Alice in Wonderland	i--'  'oh, don't bother me,' said the duchess; 'i never could abide figures!'
Alice in Wonderland	and with that she began nursing her child again, singing a sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at the end of every line:  'speak roughly to your little boy, and beat him when he sneezes: he only does it to annoy, because he knows it teases.'
Alice in Wonderland	chorus.
Alice in Wonderland	(in which the cook and the baby joined):--  'wow!
Alice in Wonderland	wow!
Alice in Wonderland	wow!'
Alice in Wonderland	while the duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so, that alice could hardly hear the words:--  'i speak severely to my boy, i beat him when he sneezes; for he can thoroughly enjoy the pepper when he pleases!'
Alice in Wonderland	chorus.
Alice in Wonderland	'wow!
Alice in Wonderland	wow!
Alice in Wonderland	wow!'
Alice in Wonderland	'here!
Alice in Wonderland	you may nurse it a bit, if you like!'
Alice in Wonderland	the duchess said to alice, flinging the baby at her as she spoke.
Alice in Wonderland	'i must go and get ready to play croquet with the queen,' and she hurried out of the room.
Alice in Wonderland	the cook threw a frying-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.
Alice in Wonderland	alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shaped little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions, 'just like a star-fish,' thought alice.
Alice in Wonderland	the poor little thing was snorting like a steam-engine when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up and straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for the first minute or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.
Alice in Wonderland	as soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, (which was to twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its right ear and left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carried it out into the open air.
Alice in Wonderland	'if i don't take this child away with me,' thought alice, 'they're sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldn't it be murder to leave it behind?'
Alice in Wonderland	she said the last words out loud, and the little thing grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time).
Alice in Wonderland	'don't grunt,' said alice; 'that's not at all a proper way of expressing yourself.'
Alice in Wonderland	the baby grunted again, and alice looked very anxiously into its face to see what was the matter with it.
Alice in Wonderland	there could be no doubt that it had a very turn-up nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also its eyes were getting extremely small for a baby: altogether alice did not like the look of the thing at all.
Alice in Wonderland	'but perhaps it was only sobbing,' she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if there were any tears.
Alice in Wonderland	no, there were no tears.
Alice in Wonderland	'if you're going to turn into a pig, my dear,' said alice, seriously, 'i'll have nothing more to do with you.
Alice in Wonderland	mind now!'
Alice in Wonderland	the poor little thing sobbed again (or grunted, it was impossible to say which), and they went on for some while in silence.
Alice in Wonderland	alice was just beginning to think to herself, 'now, what am i to do with this creature when i get it home?'
Alice in Wonderland	when it grunted again, so violently, that she looked down into its face in some alarm.
Alice in Wonderland	this time there could be no mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than a pig, and she felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it further.
Alice in Wonderland	so she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to see it trot away quietly into the wood.
Alice in Wonderland	'if it had grown up,' she said to herself, 'it would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes rather a handsome pig, i think.'
Alice in Wonderland	and she began thinking over other children she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just saying to herself, 'if one only knew the right way to change them--' when she was a little startled by seeing the cheshire cat sitting on a bough of a tree a few yards off.
Alice in Wonderland	the cat only grinned when it saw alice.
Alice in Wonderland	it looked good-natured, she thought: still it had very long claws and a great many teeth, so she felt that it ought to be treated with respect.
Alice in Wonderland	'cheshire puss,' she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all know whether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little wider.
Alice in Wonderland	'come, it's pleased so far,' thought alice, and she went on.
Alice in Wonderland	'would you tell me, please, which way i ought to go from here?'
Alice in Wonderland	'that depends a good deal on where you want to get to,' said the cat.
Alice in Wonderland	'i don't much care where--' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'then it doesn't matter which way you go,' said the cat.  '
Alice in Wonderland	--so long as i get somewhere,' alice added as an explanation.
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, you're sure to do that,' said the cat, 'if you only walk long enough.'
Alice in Wonderland	alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another question.
Alice in Wonderland	'what sort of people live about here?'
Alice in Wonderland	'in that direction,' the cat said, waving its right paw round, 'lives a hatter: and in that direction,' waving the other paw, 'lives a march hare.
Alice in Wonderland	visit either you like: they're both mad.'
Alice in Wonderland	'but i don't want to go among mad people,' alice remarked.
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, you can't help that,' said the cat: 'we're all mad here.
Alice in Wonderland	i'm mad.
Alice in Wonderland	you're mad.'
Alice in Wonderland	'how do you know i'm mad?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'you must be,' said the cat, 'or you wouldn't have come here.'
Alice in Wonderland	alice didn't think that proved it at all; however, she went on 'and how do you know that you're mad?'
Alice in Wonderland	'to begin with,' said the cat, 'a dog's not mad.
Alice in Wonderland	you grant that?'
Alice in Wonderland	'i suppose so,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'well, then,' the cat went on, 'you see, a dog growls when it's angry, and wags its tail when it's pleased.
Alice in Wonderland	now i growl when i'm pleased, and wag my tail when i'm angry.
Alice in Wonderland	therefore i'm mad.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i call it purring, not growling,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'call it what you like,' said the cat.
Alice in Wonderland	'do you play croquet with the queen to-day?'
Alice in Wonderland	'i should like it very much,' said alice, 'but i haven't been invited yet.'
Alice in Wonderland	'you'll see me there,' said the cat, and vanished.
Alice in Wonderland	alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queer things happening.
Alice in Wonderland	while she was looking at the place where it had been, it suddenly appeared again.
Alice in Wonderland	'by-the-bye, what became of the baby?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the cat.
Alice in Wonderland	'i'd nearly forgotten to ask.'
Alice in Wonderland	'it turned into a pig,' alice quietly said, just as if it had come back in a natural way.
Alice in Wonderland	'i thought it would,' said the cat, and vanished again.
Alice in Wonderland	alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did not appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the direction in which the march hare was said to live.
Alice in Wonderland	'i've seen hatters before,' she said to herself; 'the march hare will be much the most interesting, and perhaps as this is may it won't be raving mad--at least not so mad as it was in march.'
Alice in Wonderland	as she said this, she looked up, and there was the cat again, sitting on a branch of a tree.
Alice in Wonderland	'did you say pig, or fig?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the cat.
Alice in Wonderland	'i said pig,' replied alice; 'and i wish you wouldn't keep appearing and vanishing so suddenly: you make one quite giddy.'
Alice in Wonderland	'all right,' said the cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly, beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, which remained some time after the rest of it had gone.
Alice in Wonderland	'well!
Alice in Wonderland	i've often seen a cat without a grin,' thought alice; 'but a grin without a cat!
Alice in Wonderland	it's the most curious thing i ever saw in my life!'
Alice in Wonderland	she had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the house of the march hare: she thought it must be the right house, because the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was thatched with fur.
Alice in Wonderland	it was so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had nibbled some more of the lefthand bit of mushroom, and raised herself to about two feet high: even then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself 'suppose it should be raving mad after all!
Alice in Wonderland	i almost wish i'd gone to see the hatter instead!'
Alice in Wonderland	chapter vii.
Alice in Wonderland	a mad tea-party  there was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and the march hare and the hatter were having tea at it: a dormouse was sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other two were using it as a cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking over its head.
Alice in Wonderland	'very uncomfortable for the dormouse,' thought alice; 'only, as it's asleep, i suppose it doesn't mind.'
Alice in Wonderland	the table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at one corner of it: 'no room!
Alice in Wonderland	no room!'
Alice in Wonderland	they cried out when they saw alice coming.
Alice in Wonderland	'there's plenty of room!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice indignantly, and she sat down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.
Alice in Wonderland	'have some wine,' the march hare said in an encouraging tone.
Alice in Wonderland	alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it but tea.
Alice in Wonderland	'i don't see any wine,' she remarked.
Alice in Wonderland	'there isn't any,' said the march hare.
Alice in Wonderland	'then it wasn't very civil of you to offer it,' said alice angrily.
Alice in Wonderland	'it wasn't very civil of you to sit down without being invited,' said the march hare.
Alice in Wonderland	'i didn't know it was your table,' said alice; 'it's laid for a great many more than three.'
Alice in Wonderland	'your hair wants cutting,' said the hatter.
Alice in Wonderland	he had been looking at alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was his first speech.
Alice in Wonderland	'you should learn not to make personal remarks,' alice said with some severity; 'it's very rude.'
Alice in Wonderland	the hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he said was, 'why is a raven like a writing-desk?'
Alice in Wonderland	'come, we shall have some fun now!'
Alice in Wonderland	thought alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm glad they've begun asking riddles.--i believe i can guess that,' she added aloud.
Alice in Wonderland	'do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the march hare.
Alice in Wonderland	'exactly so,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'then you should say what you mean,' the march hare went on.
Alice in Wonderland	'i do,' alice hastily replied; 'at least--at least i mean what i say--that's the same thing, you know.'
Alice in Wonderland	'not the same thing a bit!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the hatter.
Alice in Wonderland	'you might just as well say that "i see what i eat" is the same thing as "i eat what i see"!'
Alice in Wonderland	'you might just as well say,' added the march hare, 'that "i like what i get" is the same thing as "i get what i like"!'
Alice in Wonderland	'you might just as well say,' added the dormouse, who seemed to be talking in his sleep, 'that "i breathe when i sleep" is the same thing as "i sleep when i breathe"!'
Alice in Wonderland	'it is the same thing with you,' said the hatter, and here the conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and writing-desks, which wasn't much.
Alice in Wonderland	the hatter was the first to break the silence.
Alice in Wonderland	'what day of the month is it?'
Alice in Wonderland	he said, turning to alice: he had taken his watch out of his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then, and holding it to his ear.
Alice in Wonderland	alice considered a little, and then said 'the fourth.'
Alice in Wonderland	'two days wrong!'
Alice in Wonderland	sighed the hatter.
Alice in Wonderland	'i told you butter wouldn't suit the works!'
Alice in Wonderland	he added looking angrily at the march hare.
Alice in Wonderland	'it was the best butter,' the march hare meekly replied.
Alice in Wonderland	'yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,' the hatter grumbled: 'you shouldn't have put it in with the bread-knife.'
Alice in Wonderland	the march hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of nothing better to say than his first remark, 'it was the best butter, you know.'
Alice in Wonderland	alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity.
Alice in Wonderland	'what a funny watch!'
Alice in Wonderland	she remarked.
Alice in Wonderland	'it tells the day of the month, and doesn't tell what o'clock it is!'
Alice in Wonderland	'why should it?'
Alice in Wonderland	muttered the hatter.
Alice in Wonderland	'does your watch tell you what year it is?'
Alice in Wonderland	'of course not,' alice replied very readily: 'but that's because it stays the same year for such a long time together.'
Alice in Wonderland	'which is just the case with mine,' said the hatter.
Alice in Wonderland	alice felt dreadfully puzzled.
Alice in Wonderland	the hatter's remark seemed to have no sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly english.
Alice in Wonderland	'i don't quite understand you,' she said, as politely as she could.
Alice in Wonderland	'the dormouse is asleep again,' said the hatter, and he poured a little hot tea upon its nose.
Alice in Wonderland	the dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without opening its eyes, 'of course, of course; just what i was going to remark myself.'
Alice in Wonderland	'have you guessed the riddle yet?'
Alice in Wonderland	the hatter said, turning to alice again.
Alice in Wonderland	'no, i give it up,' alice replied: 'what's the answer?'
Alice in Wonderland	'i haven't the slightest idea,' said the hatter.
Alice in Wonderland	'nor i,' said the march hare.
Alice in Wonderland	alice sighed wearily.
Alice in Wonderland	'i think you might do something better with the time,' she said, 'than waste it in asking riddles that have no answers.'
Alice in Wonderland	'if you knew time as well as i do,' said the hatter, 'you wouldn't talk about wasting it.
Alice in Wonderland	it's him.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i don't know what you mean,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'of course you don't!'
Alice in Wonderland	the hatter said, tossing his head contemptuously.
Alice in Wonderland	'i dare say you never even spoke to time!'
Alice in Wonderland	'perhaps not,' alice cautiously replied: 'but i know i have to beat time when i learn music.'
Alice in Wonderland	'ah!
Alice in Wonderland	that accounts for it,' said the hatter.
Alice in Wonderland	'he won't stand beating.
Alice in Wonderland	now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he'd do almost anything you liked with the clock.
Alice in Wonderland	for instance, suppose it were nine o'clock in the morning, just time to begin lessons: you'd only have to whisper a hint to time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling!
Alice in Wonderland	half-past one, time for dinner!'
Alice in Wonderland	('i only wish it was,' the march hare said to itself in a whisper.)
Alice in Wonderland	'that would be grand, certainly,' said alice thoughtfully: 'but then--i shouldn't be hungry for it, you know.'
Alice in Wonderland	'not at first, perhaps,' said the hatter: 'but you could keep it to half-past one as long as you liked.'
Alice in Wonderland	'is that the way you manage?'
Alice in Wonderland	alice asked.
Alice in Wonderland	the hatter shook his head mournfully.
Alice in Wonderland	'not i!'
Alice in Wonderland	he replied.
Alice in Wonderland	'we quarrelled last march--just before he went mad, you know--' (pointing with his tea spoon at the march hare,) '--it was at the great concert given by the queen of hearts, and i had to sing  "twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
Alice in Wonderland	how i wonder what you're at!"
Alice in Wonderland	you know the song, perhaps?'
Alice in Wonderland	'i've heard something like it,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'it goes on, you know,' the hatter continued, 'in this way:--  "up above the world you fly, like a tea-tray in the sky.
Alice in Wonderland	twinkle, twinkle--"'  here the dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep 'twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle--' and went on so long that they had to pinch it to make it stop.
Alice in Wonderland	'well, i'd hardly finished the first verse,' said the hatter, 'when the queen jumped up and bawled out, "he's murdering the time!
Alice in Wonderland	off with his head!"'
Alice in Wonderland	'how dreadfully savage!'
Alice in Wonderland	exclaimed alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'and ever since that,' the hatter went on in a mournful tone, 'he won't do a thing i ask!
Alice in Wonderland	it's always six o'clock now.'
Alice in Wonderland	a bright idea came into alice's head.
Alice in Wonderland	'is that the reason so many tea-things are put out here?'
Alice in Wonderland	she asked.
Alice in Wonderland	'yes, that's it,' said the hatter with a sigh: 'it's always tea-time, and we've no time to wash the things between whiles.'
Alice in Wonderland	'then you keep moving round, i suppose?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'exactly so,' said the hatter: 'as the things get used up.'
Alice in Wonderland	'but what happens when you come to the beginning again?'
Alice in Wonderland	alice ventured to ask.
Alice in Wonderland	'suppose we change the subject,' the march hare interrupted, yawning.
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm getting tired of this.
Alice in Wonderland	i vote the young lady tells us a story.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm afraid i don't know one,' said alice, rather alarmed at the proposal.
Alice in Wonderland	'then the dormouse shall!'
Alice in Wonderland	they both cried.
Alice in Wonderland	'wake up, dormouse!'
Alice in Wonderland	and they pinched it on both sides at once.
Alice in Wonderland	the dormouse slowly opened his eyes.
Alice in Wonderland	'i wasn't asleep,' he said in a hoarse, feeble voice: 'i heard every word you fellows were saying.'
Alice in Wonderland	'tell us a story!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the march hare.
Alice in Wonderland	'yes, please do!'
Alice in Wonderland	pleaded alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'and be quick about it,' added the hatter, 'or you'll be asleep again before it's done.'
Alice in Wonderland	'once upon a time there were three little sisters,' the dormouse began in a great hurry; 'and their names were elsie, lacie, and tillie; and they lived at the bottom of a well--'  'what did they live on?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, who always took a great interest in questions of eating and drinking.
Alice in Wonderland	'they lived on treacle,' said the dormouse, after thinking a minute or two.
Alice in Wonderland	'they couldn't have done that, you know,' alice gently remarked; 'they'd have been ill.'  'so they were,' said the dormouse; 'very ill.'  alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways of living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: 'but why did they live at the bottom of a well?'
Alice in Wonderland	'take some more tea,' the march hare said to alice, very earnestly.
Alice in Wonderland	'i've had nothing yet,' alice replied in an offended tone, 'so i can't take more.'
Alice in Wonderland	'you mean you can't take less,' said the hatter: 'it's very easy to take more than nothing.'
Alice in Wonderland	'nobody asked your opinion,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'who's making personal remarks now?'
Alice in Wonderland	the hatter asked triumphantly.
Alice in Wonderland	alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself to some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the dormouse, and repeated her question.
Alice in Wonderland	'why did they live at the bottom of a well?'
Alice in Wonderland	the dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and then said, 'it was a treacle-well.'
Alice in Wonderland	'there's no such thing!'
Alice in Wonderland	alice was beginning very angrily, but the hatter and the march hare went 'sh!
Alice in Wonderland	sh!'
Alice in Wonderland	and the dormouse sulkily remarked, 'if you can't be civil, you'd better finish the story for yourself.'
Alice in Wonderland	'no, please go on!'
Alice in Wonderland	alice said very humbly; 'i won't interrupt again.
Alice in Wonderland	i dare say there may be one.'
Alice in Wonderland	'one, indeed!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the dormouse indignantly.
Alice in Wonderland	however, he consented to go on.
Alice in Wonderland	'and so these three little sisters--they were learning to draw, you know--'  'what did they draw?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, quite forgetting her promise.
Alice in Wonderland	'treacle,' said the dormouse, without considering at all this time.
Alice in Wonderland	'i want a clean cup,' interrupted the hatter: 'let's all move one place on.'
Alice in Wonderland	he moved on as he spoke, and the dormouse followed him: the march hare moved into the dormouse's place, and alice rather unwillingly took the place of the march hare.
Alice in Wonderland	the hatter was the only one who got any advantage from the change: and alice was a good deal worse off than before, as the march hare had just upset the milk-jug into his plate.
Alice in Wonderland	alice did not wish to offend the dormouse again, so she began very cautiously: 'but i don't understand.
Alice in Wonderland	where did they draw the treacle from?'
Alice in Wonderland	'you can draw water out of a water-well,' said the hatter; 'so i should think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well--eh, stupid?'
Alice in Wonderland	'but they were in the well,' alice said to the dormouse, not choosing to notice this last remark.
Alice in Wonderland	'of course they were', said the dormouse; '--well in.'
Alice in Wonderland	this answer so confused poor alice, that she let the dormouse go on for some time without interrupting it.
Alice in Wonderland	'they were learning to draw,' the dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; 'and they drew all manner of things--everything that begins with an m--'  'why with an m?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'why not?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the march hare.
Alice in Wonderland	alice was silent.
Alice in Wonderland	the dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into a doze; but, on being pinched by the hatter, it woke up again with a little shriek, and went on: '--that begins with an m, such as mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness--you know you say things are "much of a muchness"--did you ever see such a thing as a drawing of a muchness?'
Alice in Wonderland	'really, now you ask me,' said alice, very much confused, 'i don't think--'  'then you shouldn't talk,' said the hatter.
Alice in Wonderland	this piece of rudeness was more than alice could bear: she got up in great disgust, and walked off; the dormouse fell asleep instantly, and neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she looked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her: the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the dormouse into the teapot.
Alice in Wonderland	'at any rate i'll never go there again!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice as she picked her way through the wood.
Alice in Wonderland	'it's the stupidest tea-party i ever was at in all my life!'
Alice in Wonderland	just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door leading right into it.
Alice in Wonderland	'that's very curious!'
Alice in Wonderland	she thought.
Alice in Wonderland	'but everything's curious today.
Alice in Wonderland	i think i may as well go in at once.'
Alice in Wonderland	and in she went.
Alice in Wonderland	once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little glass table.
Alice in Wonderland	'now, i'll manage better this time,' she said to herself, and began by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door that led into the garden.
Alice in Wonderland	then she went to work nibbling at the mushroom (she had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high: then she walked down the little passage: and then--she found herself at last in the beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the cool fountains.
Alice in Wonderland	chapter viii.
Alice in Wonderland	the queen's croquet-ground  a large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busily painting them red.
Alice in Wonderland	alice thought this a very curious thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard one of them say, 'look out now, five!
Alice in Wonderland	don't go splashing paint over me like that!'
Alice in Wonderland	'i couldn't help it,' said five, in a sulky tone; 'seven jogged my elbow.'
Alice in Wonderland	on which seven looked up and said, 'that's right, five!
Alice in Wonderland	always lay the blame on others!'
Alice in Wonderland	'you'd better not talk!'
Alice in Wonderland	said five.
Alice in Wonderland	'i heard the queen say only yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!'
Alice in Wonderland	'what for?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the one who had spoken first.
Alice in Wonderland	'that's none of your business, two!'
Alice in Wonderland	said seven.
Alice in Wonderland	'yes, it is his business!'
Alice in Wonderland	said five, 'and i'll tell him--it was for bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.'
Alice in Wonderland	seven flung down his brush, and had just begun 'well, of all the unjust things--' when his eye chanced to fall upon alice, as she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also, and all of them bowed low.
Alice in Wonderland	'would you tell me,' said alice, a little timidly, 'why you are painting those roses?'
Alice in Wonderland	five and seven said nothing, but looked at two.
Alice in Wonderland	two began in a low voice, 'why the fact is, you see, miss, this here ought to have been a red rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if the queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know.
Alice in Wonderland	so you see, miss, we're doing our best, afore she comes, to--' at this moment five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called out 'the queen!
Alice in Wonderland	the queen!'
Alice in Wonderland	and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon their faces.
Alice in Wonderland	there was a sound of many footsteps, and alice looked round, eager to see the queen.
Alice in Wonderland	first came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at the corners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers did.
Alice in Wonderland	after these came the royal children; there were ten of them, and the little dears came jumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples: they were all ornamented with hearts.
Alice in Wonderland	next came the guests, mostly kings and queens, and among them alice recognised the white rabbit: it was talking in a hurried nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without noticing her.
Alice in Wonderland	then followed the knave of hearts, carrying the king's crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this grand procession, came the king and queen of hearts.
Alice in Wonderland	alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard of such a rule at processions; 'and besides, what would be the use of a procession,' thought she, 'if people had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldn't see it?'
Alice in Wonderland	so she stood still where she was, and waited.
Alice in Wonderland	when the procession came opposite to alice, they all stopped and looked at her, and the queen said severely 'who is this?'
Alice in Wonderland	she said it to the knave of hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.
Alice in Wonderland	'idiot!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to alice, she went on, 'what's your name, child?'
Alice in Wonderland	'my name is alice, so please your majesty,' said alice very politely; but she added, to herself, 'why, they're only a pack of cards, after all.
Alice in Wonderland	i needn't be afraid of them!'
Alice in Wonderland	'and who are these?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the queen, pointing to the three gardeners who were lying round the rosetree; for, you see, as they were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her own children.
Alice in Wonderland	'how should i know?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, surprised at her own courage.
Alice in Wonderland	'it's no business of mine.'
Alice in Wonderland	the queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a moment like a wild beast, screamed 'off with her head!
Alice in Wonderland	off--'  'nonsense!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the queen was silent.
Alice in Wonderland	the king laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said 'consider, my dear: she is only a child!'
Alice in Wonderland	the queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the knave 'turn them over!'
Alice in Wonderland	the knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.
Alice in Wonderland	'get up!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the king, the queen, the royal children, and everybody else.
Alice in Wonderland	'leave off that!'
Alice in Wonderland	screamed the queen.
Alice in Wonderland	'you make me giddy.'
Alice in Wonderland	and then, turning to the rose-tree, she went on, 'what have you been doing here?'
Alice in Wonderland	'may it please your majesty,' said two, in a very humble tone, going down on one knee as he spoke, 'we were trying--'  'i see!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses.
Alice in Wonderland	'off with their heads!'
Alice in Wonderland	and the procession moved on, three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran to alice for protection.
Alice in Wonderland	'you shan't be beheaded!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, and she put them into a large flower-pot that stood near.
Alice in Wonderland	the three soldiers wandered about for a minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the others.
Alice in Wonderland	'are their heads off?'
Alice in Wonderland	shouted the queen.
Alice in Wonderland	'their heads are gone, if it please your majesty!'
Alice in Wonderland	the soldiers shouted in reply.
Alice in Wonderland	'that's right!'
Alice in Wonderland	shouted the queen.
Alice in Wonderland	'can you play croquet?'
Alice in Wonderland	the soldiers were silent, and looked at alice, as the question was evidently meant for her.
Alice in Wonderland	'yes!'
Alice in Wonderland	shouted alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'come on, then!'
Alice in Wonderland	roared the queen, and alice joined the procession, wondering very much what would happen next.
Alice in Wonderland	'it's--it's a very fine day!'
Alice in Wonderland	said a timid voice at her side.
Alice in Wonderland	she was walking by the white rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.
Alice in Wonderland	'very,' said alice: '--where's the duchess?'
Alice in Wonderland	'hush!
Alice in Wonderland	hush!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the rabbit in a low, hurried tone.
Alice in Wonderland	he looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered 'she's under sentence of execution.'
Alice in Wonderland	'what for?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'did you say "what a pity!"?'
Alice in Wonderland	the rabbit asked.
Alice in Wonderland	'no, i didn't,' said alice: 'i don't think it's at all a pity.
Alice in Wonderland	i said "what for?"'
Alice in Wonderland	'she boxed the queen's ears--' the rabbit began.
Alice in Wonderland	alice gave a little scream of laughter.
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, hush!'
Alice in Wonderland	the rabbit whispered in a frightened tone.
Alice in Wonderland	'the queen will hear you!
Alice in Wonderland	you see, she came rather late, and the queen said--'  'get to your places!'
Alice in Wonderland	shouted the queen in a voice of thunder, and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each other; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game began.
Alice in Wonderland	alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.
Alice in Wonderland	the chief difficulty alice found at first was in managing her flamingo: she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it would twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the ground, alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.
Alice in Wonderland	the players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short time the queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and shouting 'off with his head!'
Alice in Wonderland	or 'off with her head!'
Alice in Wonderland	about once in a minute.
Alice in Wonderland	alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any dispute with the queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute, 'and then,' thought she, 'what would become of me?
Alice in Wonderland	they're dreadfully fond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that there's any one left alive!'
Alice in Wonderland	she was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself 'it's the cheshire cat: now i shall have somebody to talk to.'
Alice in Wonderland	'how are you getting on?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the cat, as soon as there was mouth enough for it to speak with.
Alice in Wonderland	alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded.
Alice in Wonderland	'it's no use speaking to it,' she thought, 'till its ears have come, or at least one of them.'
Alice in Wonderland	in another minute the whole head appeared, and then alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her.
Alice in Wonderland	the cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.
Alice in Wonderland	'i don't think they play at all fairly,' alice began, in rather a complaining tone, 'and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can't hear oneself speak--and they don't seem to have any rules in particular; at least, if there are, nobody attends to them--and you've no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, there's the arch i've got to go through next walking about at the other end of the ground--and i should have croqueted the queen's hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it saw mine coming!'
Alice in Wonderland	'how do you like the queen?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the cat in a low voice.
Alice in Wonderland	'not at all,' said alice: 'she's so extremely--' just then she noticed that the queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on, '--likely to win, that it's hardly worth while finishing the game.'
Alice in Wonderland	the queen smiled and passed on.
Alice in Wonderland	'who are you talking to?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the king, going up to alice, and looking at the cat's head with great curiosity.
Alice in Wonderland	'it's a friend of mine--a cheshire cat,' said alice: 'allow me to introduce it.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i don't like the look of it at all,' said the king: 'however, it may kiss my hand if it likes.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i'd rather not,' the cat remarked.
Alice in Wonderland	'don't be impertinent,' said the king, 'and don't look at me like that!'
Alice in Wonderland	he got behind alice as he spoke.
Alice in Wonderland	'a cat may look at a king,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'i've read that in some book, but i don't remember where.'
Alice in Wonderland	'well, it must be removed,' said the king very decidedly, and he called the queen, who was passing at the moment, 'my dear!
Alice in Wonderland	i wish you would have this cat removed!'
Alice in Wonderland	the queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small.
Alice in Wonderland	'off with his head!'
Alice in Wonderland	she said, without even looking round.
Alice in Wonderland	'i'll fetch the executioner myself,' said the king eagerly, and he hurried off.
Alice in Wonderland	alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going on, as she heard the queen's voice in the distance, screaming with passion.
Alice in Wonderland	she had already heard her sentence three of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or not.
Alice in Wonderland	so she went in search of her hedgehog.
Alice in Wonderland	the hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed to alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree.
Alice in Wonderland	by the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: 'but it doesn't matter much,' thought alice, 'as all the arches are gone from this side of the ground.'
Alice in Wonderland	so she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her friend.
Alice in Wonderland	when she got back to the cheshire cat, she was surprised to find quite a large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between the executioner, the king, and the queen, who were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.
Alice in Wonderland	the moment alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly what they said.
Alice in Wonderland	the executioner's argument was, that you couldn't cut off a head unless there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a thing before, and he wasn't going to begin at his time of life.
Alice in Wonderland	the king's argument was, that anything that had a head could be beheaded, and that you weren't to talk nonsense.
Alice in Wonderland	the queen's argument was, that if something wasn't done about it in less than no time she'd have everybody executed, all round.
Alice in Wonderland	(it was this last remark that had made the whole party look so grave and anxious.)
Alice in Wonderland	alice could think of nothing else to say but 'it belongs to the duchess: you'd better ask her about it.'
Alice in Wonderland	'she's in prison,' the queen said to the executioner: 'fetch her here.'
Alice in Wonderland	and the executioner went off like an arrow.
Alice in Wonderland	the cat's head began fading away the moment he was gone, and, by the time he had come back with the duchess, it had entirely disappeared; so the king and the executioner ran wildly up and down looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.
Alice in Wonderland	chapter ix.
Alice in Wonderland	the mock turtle's story  'you can't think how glad i am to see you again, you dear old thing!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into alice's, and they walked off together.
Alice in Wonderland	alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so savage when they met in the kitchen.
Alice in Wonderland	'when i'm a duchess,' she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful tone though), 'i won't have any pepper in my kitchen at all.
Alice in Wonderland	soup does very well without--maybe it's always pepper that makes people hot-tempered,' she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new kind of rule, 'and vinegar that makes them sour--and camomile that makes them bitter--and--and barley-sugar and such things that make children sweet-tempered.
Alice in Wonderland	i only wish people knew that: then they wouldn't be so stingy about it, you know--'  she had quite forgotten the duchess by this time, and was a little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear.
Alice in Wonderland	'you're thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk.
Alice in Wonderland	i can't tell you just now what the moral of that is, but i shall remember it in a bit.'
Alice in Wonderland	'perhaps it hasn't one,' alice ventured to remark.
Alice in Wonderland	'tut, tut, child!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the duchess.
Alice in Wonderland	'everything's got a moral, if only you can find it.'
Alice in Wonderland	and she squeezed herself up closer to alice's side as she spoke.
Alice in Wonderland	alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because the duchess was very ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the right height to rest her chin upon alice's shoulder, and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin.
Alice in Wonderland	however, she did not like to be rude, so she bore it as well as she could.
Alice in Wonderland	'the game's going on rather better now,' she said, by way of keeping up the conversation a little.
Alice in Wonderland	''tis so,' said the duchess: 'and the moral of that is--"oh, 'tis love, 'tis love, that makes the world go round!"'
Alice in Wonderland	'somebody said,' alice whispered, 'that it's done by everybody minding their own business!'
Alice in Wonderland	'ah, well!
Alice in Wonderland	it means much the same thing,' said the duchess, digging her sharp little chin into alice's shoulder as she added, 'and the moral of that is--"take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of themselves."'
Alice in Wonderland	'how fond she is of finding morals in things!'
Alice in Wonderland	alice thought to herself.
Alice in Wonderland	'i dare say you're wondering why i don't put my arm round your waist,' the duchess said after a pause: 'the reason is, that i'm doubtful about the temper of your flamingo.
Alice in Wonderland	shall i try the experiment?'
Alice in Wonderland	'he might bite,' alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all anxious to have the experiment tried.
Alice in Wonderland	'very true,' said the duchess: 'flamingoes and mustard both bite.
Alice in Wonderland	and the moral of that is--"birds of a feather flock together."'
Alice in Wonderland	'only mustard isn't a bird,' alice remarked.
Alice in Wonderland	'right, as usual,' said the duchess: 'what a clear way you have of putting things!'
Alice in Wonderland	'it's a mineral, i think,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'of course it is,' said the duchess, who seemed ready to agree to everything that alice said; 'there's a large mustard-mine near here.
Alice in Wonderland	and the moral of that is--"the more there is of mine, the less there is of yours."'
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, i know!'
Alice in Wonderland	exclaimed alice, who had not attended to this last remark, 'it's a vegetable.
Alice in Wonderland	it doesn't look like one, but it is.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i quite agree with you,' said the duchess; 'and the moral of that is--"be what you would seem to be"--or if you'd like it put more simply--"never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it might appear to others that what you were or might have been was not otherwise than what you had been would have appeared to them to be otherwise."'
Alice in Wonderland	'i think i should understand that better,' alice said very politely, 'if i had it written down: but i can't quite follow it as you say it.'
Alice in Wonderland	'that's nothing to what i could say if i chose,' the duchess replied, in a pleased tone.
Alice in Wonderland	'pray don't trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, don't talk about trouble!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the duchess.
Alice in Wonderland	'i make you a present of everything i've said as yet.'
Alice in Wonderland	'a cheap sort of present!'
Alice in Wonderland	thought alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm glad they don't give birthday presents like that!'
Alice in Wonderland	but she did not venture to say it out loud.
Alice in Wonderland	'thinking again?'
Alice in Wonderland	the duchess asked, with another dig of her sharp little chin.
Alice in Wonderland	'i've a right to think,' said alice sharply, for she was beginning to feel a little worried.
Alice in Wonderland	'just about as much right,' said the duchess, 'as pigs have to fly; and the m--'  but here, to alice's great surprise, the duchess's voice died away, even in the middle of her favourite word 'moral,' and the arm that was linked into hers began to tremble.
Alice in Wonderland	alice looked up, and there stood the queen in front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm.
Alice in Wonderland	'a fine day, your majesty!'
Alice in Wonderland	the duchess began in a low, weak voice.
Alice in Wonderland	'now, i give you fair warning,' shouted the queen, stamping on the ground as she spoke; 'either you or your head must be off, and that in about half no time!
Alice in Wonderland	take your choice!'
Alice in Wonderland	the duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.
Alice in Wonderland	'let's go on with the game,' the queen said to alice; and alice was too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the croquet-ground.
Alice in Wonderland	the other guests had taken advantage of the queen's absence, and were resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried back to the game, the queen merely remarking that a moment's delay would cost them their lives.
Alice in Wonderland	all the time they were playing the queen never left off quarrelling with the other players, and shouting 'off with his head!'
Alice in Wonderland	or 'off with her head!'
Alice in Wonderland	those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that by the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and all the players, except the king, the queen, and alice, were in custody and under sentence of execution.
Alice in Wonderland	then the queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to alice, 'have you seen the mock turtle yet?'
Alice in Wonderland	'no,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'i don't even know what a mock turtle is.'
Alice in Wonderland	'it's the thing mock turtle soup is made from,' said the queen.
Alice in Wonderland	'i never saw one, or heard of one,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'come on, then,' said the queen, 'and he shall tell you his history,'  as they walked off together, alice heard the king say in a low voice, to the company generally, 'you are all pardoned.'
Alice in Wonderland	'come, that's a good thing!'
Alice in Wonderland	she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at the number of executions the queen had ordered.
Alice in Wonderland	they very soon came upon a gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun.
Alice in Wonderland	(if you don't know what a gryphon is, look at the picture.)
Alice in Wonderland	'up, lazy thing!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the queen, 'and take this young lady to see the mock turtle, and to hear his history.
Alice in Wonderland	i must go back and see after some executions i have ordered'; and she walked off, leaving alice alone with the gryphon.
Alice in Wonderland	alice did not quite like the look of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage queen: so she waited.
Alice in Wonderland	the gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the queen till she was out of sight: then it chuckled.
Alice in Wonderland	'what fun!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the gryphon, half to itself, half to alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'what is the fun?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'why, she,' said the gryphon.
Alice in Wonderland	'it's all her fancy, that: they never executes nobody, you know.
Alice in Wonderland	come on!'
Alice in Wonderland	'everybody says "come on!"
Alice in Wonderland	here,' thought alice, as she went slowly after it: 'i never was so ordered about in all my life, never!'
Alice in Wonderland	they had not gone far before they saw the mock turtle in the distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came nearer, alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break.
Alice in Wonderland	she pitied him deeply.
Alice in Wonderland	'what is his sorrow?'
Alice in Wonderland	she asked the gryphon, and the gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, 'it's all his fancy, that: he hasn't got no sorrow, you know.
Alice in Wonderland	come on!'
Alice in Wonderland	so they went up to the mock turtle, who looked at them with large eyes full of tears, but said nothing.
Alice in Wonderland	'this here young lady,' said the gryphon, 'she wants for to know your history, she do.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i'll tell it her,' said the mock turtle in a deep, hollow tone: 'sit down, both of you, and don't speak a word till i've finished.'
Alice in Wonderland	so they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes.
Alice in Wonderland	alice thought to herself, 'i don't see how he can even finish, if he doesn't begin.'
Alice in Wonderland	but she waited patiently.
Alice in Wonderland	'once,' said the mock turtle at last, with a deep sigh, 'i was a real turtle.'
Alice in Wonderland	these words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an occasional exclamation of 'hjckrrh!'
Alice in Wonderland	from the gryphon, and the constant heavy sobbing of the mock turtle.
Alice in Wonderland	alice was very nearly getting up and saying, 'thank you, sir, for your interesting story,' but she could not help thinking there must be more to come, so she sat still and said nothing.
Alice in Wonderland	'when we were little,' the mock turtle went on at last, more calmly, though still sobbing a little now and then, 'we went to school in the sea.
Alice in Wonderland	the master was an old turtle--we used to call him tortoise--'  'why did you call him tortoise, if he wasn't one?'
Alice in Wonderland	alice asked.
Alice in Wonderland	'we called him tortoise because he taught us,' said the mock turtle angrily: 'really you are very dull!'
Alice in Wonderland	'you ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple question,' added the gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked at poor alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth.
Alice in Wonderland	at last the gryphon said to the mock turtle, 'drive on, old fellow!
Alice in Wonderland	don't be all day about it!'
Alice in Wonderland	and he went on in these words:  'yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn't believe it--'  'i never said i didn't!'
Alice in Wonderland	interrupted alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'you did,' said the mock turtle.
Alice in Wonderland	'hold your tongue!'
Alice in Wonderland	added the gryphon, before alice could speak again.
Alice in Wonderland	the mock turtle went on.
Alice in Wonderland	'we had the best of educations--in fact, we went to school every day--'  'i've been to a day-school, too,' said alice; 'you needn't be so proud as all that.'
Alice in Wonderland	'with extras?'
Alice in Wonderland	asked the mock turtle a little anxiously.
Alice in Wonderland	'yes,' said alice, 'we learned french and music.'
Alice in Wonderland	'and washing?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the mock turtle.
Alice in Wonderland	'certainly not!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice indignantly.
Alice in Wonderland	'ah!
Alice in Wonderland	then yours wasn't a really good school,' said the mock turtle in a tone of great relief.
Alice in Wonderland	'now at ours they had at the end of the bill, "french, music, and washing--extra."'
Alice in Wonderland	'you couldn't have wanted it much,' said alice; 'living at the bottom of the sea.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i couldn't afford to learn it.'
Alice in Wonderland	said the mock turtle with a sigh.
Alice in Wonderland	'i only took the regular course.'
Alice in Wonderland	'what was that?'
Alice in Wonderland	inquired alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'reeling and writhing, of course, to begin with,' the mock turtle replied; 'and then the different branches of arithmetic--ambition, distraction, uglification, and derision.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i never heard of "uglification,"' alice ventured to say.
Alice in Wonderland	'what is it?'
Alice in Wonderland	the gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise.
Alice in Wonderland	'what!
Alice in Wonderland	never heard of uglifying!'
Alice in Wonderland	it exclaimed.
Alice in Wonderland	'you know what to beautify is, i suppose?'
Alice in Wonderland	'yes,' said alice doubtfully: 'it means--to--make--anything--prettier.'
Alice in Wonderland	'well, then,' the gryphon went on, 'if you don't know what to uglify is, you are a simpleton.'
Alice in Wonderland	alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so she turned to the mock turtle, and said 'what else had you to learn?'
Alice in Wonderland	'well, there was mystery,' the mock turtle replied, counting off the subjects on his flappers, '--mystery, ancient and modern, with seaography: then drawling--the drawling-master was an old conger-eel, that used to come once a week: he taught us drawling, stretching, and fainting in coils.'
Alice in Wonderland	'what was that like?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'well, i can't show it you myself,' the mock turtle said: 'i'm too stiff.
Alice in Wonderland	and the gryphon never learnt it.'
Alice in Wonderland	'hadn't time,' said the gryphon: 'i went to the classics master, though.
Alice in Wonderland	he was an old crab, he was.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i never went to him,' the mock turtle said with a sigh: 'he taught laughing and grief, they used to say.'
Alice in Wonderland	'so he did, so he did,' said the gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both creatures hid their faces in their paws.
Alice in Wonderland	'and how many hours a day did you do lessons?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, in a hurry to change the subject.
Alice in Wonderland	'ten hours the first day,' said the mock turtle: 'nine the next, and so on.'
Alice in Wonderland	'what a curious plan!'
Alice in Wonderland	exclaimed alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'that's the reason they're called lessons,' the gryphon remarked: 'because they lessen from day to day.'
Alice in Wonderland	this was quite a new idea to alice, and she thought it over a little before she made her next remark.
Alice in Wonderland	'then the eleventh day must have been a holiday?'
Alice in Wonderland	'of course it was,' said the mock turtle.
Alice in Wonderland	'and how did you manage on the twelfth?'
Alice in Wonderland	alice went on eagerly.
Alice in Wonderland	'that's enough about lessons,' the gryphon interrupted in a very decided tone: 'tell her something about the games now.'
Alice in Wonderland	chapter x. the lobster quadrille  the mock turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across his eyes.
Alice in Wonderland	he looked at alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or two sobs choked his voice.
Alice in Wonderland	'same as if he had a bone in his throat,' said the gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him in the back.
Alice in Wonderland	at last the mock turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on again:--  'you may not have lived much under the sea--' ('i haven't,' said alice)--'and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster--' (alice began to say 'i once tasted--' but checked herself hastily, and said 'no, never') '--so you can have no idea what a delightful thing a lobster quadrille is!'
Alice in Wonderland	'no, indeed,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'what sort of a dance is it?'
Alice in Wonderland	'why,' said the gryphon, 'you first form into a line along the sea-shore--'  'two lines!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried the mock turtle.
Alice in Wonderland	'seals, turtles, salmon, and so on; then, when you've cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way--'  'that generally takes some time,' interrupted the gryphon.  '
Alice in Wonderland	--you advance twice--'  'each with a lobster as a partner!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried the gryphon.
Alice in Wonderland	'of course,' the mock turtle said: 'advance twice, set to partners--'  '--change lobsters, and retire in same order,' continued the gryphon.
Alice in Wonderland	'then, you know,' the mock turtle went on, 'you throw the--'  'the lobsters!'
Alice in Wonderland	shouted the gryphon, with a bound into the air.  '
Alice in Wonderland	--as far out to sea as you can--'  'swim after them!'
Alice in Wonderland	screamed the gryphon.
Alice in Wonderland	'turn a somersault in the sea!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried the mock turtle, capering wildly about.
Alice in Wonderland	'change lobsters again!'
Alice in Wonderland	yelled the gryphon at the top of its voice.
Alice in Wonderland	'back to land again, and that's all the first figure,' said the mock turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very sadly and quietly, and looked at alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'it must be a very pretty dance,' said alice timidly.
Alice in Wonderland	'would you like to see a little of it?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the mock turtle.
Alice in Wonderland	'very much indeed,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'come, let's try the first figure!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the mock turtle to the gryphon.
Alice in Wonderland	'we can do without lobsters, you know.
Alice in Wonderland	which shall sing?'
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, you sing,' said the gryphon.
Alice in Wonderland	'i've forgotten the words.'
Alice in Wonderland	so they began solemnly dancing round and round alice, every now and then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving their forepaws to mark the time, while the mock turtle sang this, very slowly and sadly:--  '"will you walk a little faster?"
Alice in Wonderland	said a whiting to a snail.
Alice in Wonderland	"there's a porpoise close behind us, and he's treading on my tail.
Alice in Wonderland	see how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
Alice in Wonderland	they are waiting on the shingle--will you come and join the dance?
Alice in Wonderland	will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance?
Alice in Wonderland	will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?
Alice in Wonderland	"you can really have no notion how delightful it will be when they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!"
Alice in Wonderland	but the snail replied "too far, too far!"
Alice in Wonderland	and gave a look askance-- said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.
Alice in Wonderland	would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.
Alice in Wonderland	would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.
Alice in Wonderland	'"what matters it how far we go?"
Alice in Wonderland	his scaly friend replied.
Alice in Wonderland	"there is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
Alice in Wonderland	the further off from england the nearer is to france-- then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.
Alice in Wonderland	will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance?
Alice in Wonderland	will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?"'
Alice in Wonderland	'thank you, it's a very interesting dance to watch,' said alice, feeling very glad that it was over at last: 'and i do so like that curious song about the whiting!'
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, as to the whiting,' said the mock turtle, 'they--you've seen them, of course?'
Alice in Wonderland	'yes,' said alice, 'i've often seen them at dinn--' she checked herself hastily.
Alice in Wonderland	'i don't know where dinn may be,' said the mock turtle, 'but if you've seen them so often, of course you know what they're like.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i believe so,' alice replied thoughtfully.
Alice in Wonderland	'they have their tails in their mouths--and they're all over crumbs.'
Alice in Wonderland	'you're wrong about the crumbs,' said the mock turtle: 'crumbs would all wash off in the sea.
Alice in Wonderland	but they have their tails in their mouths; and the reason is--' here the mock turtle yawned and shut his eyes.--'tell her about the reason and all that,' he said to the gryphon.
Alice in Wonderland	'the reason is,' said the gryphon, 'that they would go with the lobsters to the dance.
Alice in Wonderland	so they got thrown out to sea.
Alice in Wonderland	so they had to fall a long way.
Alice in Wonderland	so they got their tails fast in their mouths.
Alice in Wonderland	so they couldn't get them out again.
Alice in Wonderland	that's all.'
Alice in Wonderland	'thank you,' said alice, 'it's very interesting.
Alice in Wonderland	i never knew so much about a whiting before.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i can tell you more than that, if you like,' said the gryphon.
Alice in Wonderland	'do you know why it's called a whiting?'
Alice in Wonderland	'i never thought about it,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'why?'
Alice in Wonderland	'it does the boots and shoes.'
Alice in Wonderland	the gryphon replied very solemnly.
Alice in Wonderland	alice was thoroughly puzzled.
Alice in Wonderland	'does the boots and shoes!'
Alice in Wonderland	she repeated in a wondering tone.
Alice in Wonderland	'why, what are your shoes done with?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the gryphon.
Alice in Wonderland	'i mean, what makes them so shiny?'
Alice in Wonderland	alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her answer.
Alice in Wonderland	'they're done with blacking, i believe.'
Alice in Wonderland	'boots and shoes under the sea,' the gryphon went on in a deep voice, 'are done with a whiting.
Alice in Wonderland	now you know.'
Alice in Wonderland	'and what are they made of?'
Alice in Wonderland	alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.
Alice in Wonderland	'soles and eels, of course,' the gryphon replied rather impatiently: 'any shrimp could have told you that.'
Alice in Wonderland	'if i'd been the whiting,' said alice, whose thoughts were still running on the song, 'i'd have said to the porpoise, "keep back, please: we don't want you with us!"'
Alice in Wonderland	'they were obliged to have him with them,' the mock turtle said: 'no wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.'
Alice in Wonderland	'wouldn't it really?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice in a tone of great surprise.
Alice in Wonderland	'of course not,' said the mock turtle: 'why, if a fish came to me, and told me he was going a journey, i should say "with what porpoise?"'
Alice in Wonderland	'don't you mean "purpose"?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'i mean what i say,' the mock turtle replied in an offended tone.
Alice in Wonderland	and the gryphon added 'come, let's hear some of your adventures.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i could tell you my adventures--beginning from this morning,' said alice a little timidly: 'but it's no use going back to yesterday, because i was a different person then.'
Alice in Wonderland	'explain all that,' said the mock turtle.
Alice in Wonderland	'no, no!
Alice in Wonderland	the adventures first,' said the gryphon in an impatient tone: 'explanations take such a dreadful time.'
Alice in Wonderland	so alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first saw the white rabbit.
Alice in Wonderland	she was a little nervous about it just at first, the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened their eyes and mouths so very wide, but she gained courage as she went on.
Alice in Wonderland	her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part about her repeating 'you are old, father william,' to the caterpillar, and the words all coming different, and then the mock turtle drew a long breath, and said 'that's very curious.'
Alice in Wonderland	'it's all about as curious as it can be,' said the gryphon.
Alice in Wonderland	'it all came different!'
Alice in Wonderland	the mock turtle repeated thoughtfully.
Alice in Wonderland	'i should like to hear her try and repeat something now.
Alice in Wonderland	tell her to begin.'
Alice in Wonderland	he looked at the gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of authority over alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'stand up and repeat "'tis the voice of the sluggard,"' said the gryphon.
Alice in Wonderland	'how the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!'
Alice in Wonderland	thought alice; 'i might as well be at school at once.'
Alice in Wonderland	however, she got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the lobster quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came very queer indeed:--  ''tis the voice of the lobster; i heard him declare, "you have baked me too brown, i must sugar my hair."
Alice in Wonderland	as a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.'
Alice in Wonderland	[later editions continued as follows when the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark, and will talk in contemptuous tones of the shark, but, when the tide rises and sharks are around, his voice has a timid and tremulous sound.]
Alice in Wonderland	'that's different from what i used to say when i was a child,' said the gryphon.
Alice in Wonderland	'well, i never heard it before,' said the mock turtle; 'but it sounds uncommon nonsense.'
Alice in Wonderland	alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands, wondering if anything would ever happen in a natural way again.
Alice in Wonderland	'i should like to have it explained,' said the mock turtle.
Alice in Wonderland	'she can't explain it,' said the gryphon hastily.
Alice in Wonderland	'go on with the next verse.'
Alice in Wonderland	'but about his toes?'
Alice in Wonderland	the mock turtle persisted.
Alice in Wonderland	'how could he turn them out with his nose, you know?'
Alice in Wonderland	'it's the first position in dancing.'
Alice in Wonderland	alice said; but was dreadfully puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the subject.
Alice in Wonderland	'go on with the next verse,' the gryphon repeated impatiently: 'it begins "i passed by his garden."'
Alice in Wonderland	alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:--  'i passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye, how the owl and the panther were sharing a pie--'  [later editions continued as follows the panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat, while the owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
Alice in Wonderland	when the pie was all finished, the owl, as a boon, was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon: while the panther received knife and fork with a growl, and concluded the banquet--]  'what is the use of repeating all that stuff,' the mock turtle interrupted, 'if you don't explain it as you go on?
Alice in Wonderland	it's by far the most confusing thing i ever heard!'
Alice in Wonderland	'yes, i think you'd better leave off,' said the gryphon: and alice was only too glad to do so.
Alice in Wonderland	'shall we try another figure of the lobster quadrille?'
Alice in Wonderland	the gryphon went on.
Alice in Wonderland	'or would you like the mock turtle to sing you a song?'
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, a song, please, if the mock turtle would be so kind,' alice replied, so eagerly that the gryphon said, in a rather offended tone, 'hm!
Alice in Wonderland	no accounting for tastes!
Alice in Wonderland	sing her "turtle soup," will you, old fellow?'
Alice in Wonderland	the mock turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes choked with sobs, to sing this:--  'beautiful soup, so rich and green, waiting in a hot tureen!
Alice in Wonderland	who for such dainties would not stoop?
Alice in Wonderland	soup of the evening, beautiful soup!
Alice in Wonderland	soup of the evening, beautiful soup!
Alice in Wonderland	beau--ootiful soo--oop!
Alice in Wonderland	beau--ootiful soo--oop!
Alice in Wonderland	soo--oop of the e--e--evening, beautiful, beautiful soup!
Alice in Wonderland	'beautiful soup!
Alice in Wonderland	who cares for fish, game, or any other dish?
Alice in Wonderland	who would not give all else for two pennyworth only of beautiful soup?
Alice in Wonderland	pennyworth only of beautiful soup?
Alice in Wonderland	beau--ootiful soo--oop!
Alice in Wonderland	beau--ootiful soo--oop!
Alice in Wonderland	soo--oop of the e--e--evening, beautiful, beauti--ful soup!'
Alice in Wonderland	'chorus again!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried the gryphon, and the mock turtle had just begun to repeat it, when a cry of 'the trial's beginning!'
Alice in Wonderland	was heard in the distance.
Alice in Wonderland	'come on!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried the gryphon, and, taking alice by the hand, it hurried off, without waiting for the end of the song.
Alice in Wonderland	'what trial is it?'
Alice in Wonderland	alice panted as she ran; but the gryphon only answered 'come on!'
Alice in Wonderland	and ran the faster, while more and more faintly came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words:--  'soo--oop of the e--e--evening, beautiful, beautiful soup!'
Alice in Wonderland	chapter xi.
Alice in Wonderland	who stole the tarts?
Alice in Wonderland	the king and queen of hearts were seated on their throne when they arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them--all sorts of little birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the knave was standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard him; and near the king was the white rabbit, with a trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of parchment in the other.
Alice in Wonderland	in the very middle of the court was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so good, that it made alice quite hungry to look at them--'i wish they'd get the trial done,' she thought, 'and hand round the refreshments!'
Alice in Wonderland	but there seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about her, to pass away the time.
Alice in Wonderland	alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew the name of nearly everything there.
Alice in Wonderland	'that's the judge,' she said to herself, 'because of his great wig.'
Alice in Wonderland	the judge, by the way, was the king; and as he wore his crown over the wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming.
Alice in Wonderland	'and that's the jury-box,' thought alice, 'and those twelve creatures,' (she was obliged to say 'creatures,' you see, because some of them were animals, and some were birds,) 'i suppose they are the jurors.'
Alice in Wonderland	she said this last word two or three times over to herself, being rather proud of it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little girls of her age knew the meaning of it at all.
Alice in Wonderland	however, 'jury-men' would have done just as well.
Alice in Wonderland	the twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates.
Alice in Wonderland	'what are they doing?'
Alice in Wonderland	alice whispered to the gryphon.
Alice in Wonderland	'they can't have anything to put down yet, before the trial's begun.'
Alice in Wonderland	'they're putting down their names,' the gryphon whispered in reply, 'for fear they should forget them before the end of the trial.'
Alice in Wonderland	'stupid things!'
Alice in Wonderland	alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she stopped hastily, for the white rabbit cried out, 'silence in the court!'
Alice in Wonderland	and the king put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round, to make out who was talking.
Alice in Wonderland	alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders, that all the jurors were writing down 'stupid things!'
Alice in Wonderland	on their slates, and she could even make out that one of them didn't know how to spell 'stupid,' and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him.
Alice in Wonderland	'a nice muddle their slates'll be in before the trial's over!'
Alice in Wonderland	thought alice.
Alice in Wonderland	one of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked.
Alice in Wonderland	this of course, alice could not stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, and very soon found an opportunity of taking it away.
Alice in Wonderland	she did it so quickly that the poor little juror (it was bill, the lizard) could not make out at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he was obliged to write with one finger for the rest of the day; and this was of very little use, as it left no mark on the slate.
Alice in Wonderland	'herald, read the accusation!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the king.
Alice in Wonderland	on this the white rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and then unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:--  'the queen of hearts, she made some tarts, all on a summer day: the knave of hearts, he stole those tarts, and took them quite away!'
Alice in Wonderland	'consider your verdict,' the king said to the jury.
Alice in Wonderland	'not yet, not yet!'
Alice in Wonderland	the rabbit hastily interrupted.
Alice in Wonderland	'there's a great deal to come before that!'
Alice in Wonderland	'call the first witness,' said the king; and the white rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and called out, 'first witness!'
Alice in Wonderland	the first witness was the hatter.
Alice in Wonderland	he came in with a teacup in one hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other.
Alice in Wonderland	'i beg pardon, your majesty,' he began, 'for bringing these in: but i hadn't quite finished my tea when i was sent for.'
Alice in Wonderland	'you ought to have finished,' said the king.
Alice in Wonderland	'when did you begin?'
Alice in Wonderland	the hatter looked at the march hare, who had followed him into the court, arm-in-arm with the dormouse.
Alice in Wonderland	'fourteenth of march, i think it was,' he said.
Alice in Wonderland	'fifteenth,' said the march hare.
Alice in Wonderland	'sixteenth,' added the dormouse.
Alice in Wonderland	'write that down,' the king said to the jury, and the jury eagerly wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then added them up, and reduced the answer to shillings and pence.
Alice in Wonderland	'take off your hat,' the king said to the hatter.
Alice in Wonderland	'it isn't mine,' said the hatter.
Alice in Wonderland	'stolen!'
Alice in Wonderland	the king exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly made a memorandum of the fact.
Alice in Wonderland	'i keep them to sell,' the hatter added as an explanation; 'i've none of my own.
Alice in Wonderland	i'm a hatter.'
Alice in Wonderland	here the queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the hatter, who turned pale and fidgeted.
Alice in Wonderland	'give your evidence,' said the king; 'and don't be nervous, or i'll have you executed on the spot.'
Alice in Wonderland	this did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shifting from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the queen, and in his confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the bread-and-butter.
Alice in Wonderland	just at this moment alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to grow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave the court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was as long as there was room for her.
Alice in Wonderland	'i wish you wouldn't squeeze so.'
Alice in Wonderland	said the dormouse, who was sitting next to her.
Alice in Wonderland	'i can hardly breathe.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i can't help it,' said alice very meekly: 'i'm growing.'
Alice in Wonderland	'you've no right to grow here,' said the dormouse.
Alice in Wonderland	'don't talk nonsense,' said alice more boldly: 'you know you're growing too.'
Alice in Wonderland	'yes, but i grow at a reasonable pace,' said the dormouse: 'not in that ridiculous fashion.'
Alice in Wonderland	and he got up very sulkily and crossed over to the other side of the court.
Alice in Wonderland	all this time the queen had never left off staring at the hatter, and, just as the dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officers of the court, 'bring me the list of the singers in the last concert!'
Alice in Wonderland	on which the wretched hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.
Alice in Wonderland	'give your evidence,' the king repeated angrily, 'or i'll have you executed, whether you're nervous or not.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm a poor man, your majesty,' the hatter began, in a trembling voice, '--and i hadn't begun my tea--not above a week or so--and what with the bread-and-butter getting so thin--and the twinkling of the tea--'  'the twinkling of the what?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the king.
Alice in Wonderland	'it began with the tea,' the hatter replied.
Alice in Wonderland	'of course twinkling begins with a t!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the king sharply.
Alice in Wonderland	'do you take me for a dunce?
Alice in Wonderland	go on!'
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm a poor man,' the hatter went on, 'and most things twinkled after that--only the march hare said--'  'i didn't!'
Alice in Wonderland	the march hare interrupted in a great hurry.
Alice in Wonderland	'you did!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the hatter.
Alice in Wonderland	'i deny it!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the march hare.
Alice in Wonderland	'he denies it,' said the king: 'leave out that part.'
Alice in Wonderland	'well, at any rate, the dormouse said--' the hatter went on, looking anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the dormouse denied nothing, being fast asleep.
Alice in Wonderland	'after that,' continued the hatter, 'i cut some more bread-and-butter--'  'but what did the dormouse say?'
Alice in Wonderland	one of the jury asked.
Alice in Wonderland	'that i can't remember,' said the hatter.
Alice in Wonderland	'you must remember,' remarked the king, 'or i'll have you executed.'
Alice in Wonderland	the miserable hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter, and went down on one knee.
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm a poor man, your majesty,' he began.
Alice in Wonderland	'you're a very poor speaker,' said the king.
Alice in Wonderland	here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed by the officers of the court.
Alice in Wonderland	(as that is rather a hard word, i will just explain to you how it was done.
Alice in Wonderland	they had a large canvas bag, which tied up at the mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-pig, head first, and then sat upon it.)
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm glad i've seen that done,' thought alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'i've so often read in the newspapers, at the end of trials, "there was some attempts at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the officers of the court," and i never understood what it meant till now.'
Alice in Wonderland	'if that's all you know about it, you may stand down,' continued the king.
Alice in Wonderland	'i can't go no lower,' said the hatter: 'i'm on the floor, as it is.'
Alice in Wonderland	'then you may sit down,' the king replied.
Alice in Wonderland	here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.
Alice in Wonderland	'come, that finished the guinea-pigs!'
Alice in Wonderland	thought alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'now we shall get on better.'
Alice in Wonderland	'i'd rather finish my tea,' said the hatter, with an anxious look at the queen, who was reading the list of singers.
Alice in Wonderland	'you may go,' said the king, and the hatter hurriedly left the court, without even waiting to put his shoes on.  '
Alice in Wonderland	--and just take his head off outside,' the queen added to one of the officers: but the hatter was out of sight before the officer could get to the door.
Alice in Wonderland	'call the next witness!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the king.
Alice in Wonderland	the next witness was the duchess's cook.
Alice in Wonderland	she carried the pepper-box in her hand, and alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the court, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.
Alice in Wonderland	'give your evidence,' said the king.
Alice in Wonderland	'shan't,' said the cook.
Alice in Wonderland	the king looked anxiously at the white rabbit, who said in a low voice, 'your majesty must cross-examine this witness.'
Alice in Wonderland	'well, if i must, i must,' the king said, with a melancholy air, and, after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes were nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, 'what are tarts made of?'
Alice in Wonderland	'pepper, mostly,' said the cook.
Alice in Wonderland	'treacle,' said a sleepy voice behind her.
Alice in Wonderland	'collar that dormouse,' the queen shrieked out.
Alice in Wonderland	'behead that dormouse!
Alice in Wonderland	turn that dormouse out of court!
Alice in Wonderland	suppress him!
Alice in Wonderland	pinch him!
Alice in Wonderland	off with his whiskers!'
Alice in Wonderland	for some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the dormouse turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had disappeared.
Alice in Wonderland	'never mind!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the king, with an air of great relief.
Alice in Wonderland	'call the next witness.'
Alice in Wonderland	and he added in an undertone to the queen, 'really, my dear, you must cross-examine the next witness.
Alice in Wonderland	it quite makes my forehead ache!'
Alice in Wonderland	alice watched the white rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling very curious to see what the next witness would be like, '--for they haven't got much evidence yet,' she said to herself.
Alice in Wonderland	imagine her surprise, when the white rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill little voice, the name 'alice!'
Alice in Wonderland	chapter xii.
Alice in Wonderland	alice's evidence   'here!'
Alice in Wonderland	cried alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of goldfish she had accidentally upset the week before.
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, i beg your pardon!'
Alice in Wonderland	she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident of the goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of idea that they must be collected at once and put back into the jury-box, or they would die.
Alice in Wonderland	'the trial cannot proceed,' said the king in a very grave voice, 'until all the jurymen are back in their proper places--all,' he repeated with great emphasis, looking hard at alice as he said do.
Alice in Wonderland	alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put the lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move.
Alice in Wonderland	she soon got it out again, and put it right; 'not that it signifies much,' she said to herself; 'i should think it would be quite as much use in the trial one way up as the other.'
Alice in Wonderland	as soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to them, they set to work very diligently to write out a history of the accident, all except the lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof of the court.
Alice in Wonderland	'what do you know about this business?'
Alice in Wonderland	the king said to alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'nothing,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'nothing whatever?'
Alice in Wonderland	persisted the king.
Alice in Wonderland	'nothing whatever,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'that's very important,' the king said, turning to the jury.
Alice in Wonderland	they were just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the white rabbit interrupted: 'unimportant, your majesty means, of course,' he said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as he spoke.
Alice in Wonderland	'unimportant, of course, i meant,' the king hastily said, and went on to himself in an undertone,  'important--unimportant--unimportant--important--' as if he were trying which word sounded best.
Alice in Wonderland	some of the jury wrote it down 'important,' and some 'unimportant.'
Alice in Wonderland	alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates; 'but it doesn't matter a bit,' she thought to herself.
Alice in Wonderland	at this moment the king, who had been for some time busily writing in his note-book, cackled out 'silence!'
Alice in Wonderland	and read out from his book, 'rule forty-two.
Alice in Wonderland	all persons more than a mile high to leave the court.'
Alice in Wonderland	everybody looked at alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'i'm not a mile high,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'you are,' said the king.
Alice in Wonderland	'nearly two miles high,' added the queen.
Alice in Wonderland	'well, i shan't go, at any rate,' said alice: 'besides, that's not a regular rule: you invented it just now.'
Alice in Wonderland	'it's the oldest rule in the book,' said the king.
Alice in Wonderland	'then it ought to be number one,' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	the king turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily.
Alice in Wonderland	'consider your verdict,' he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.
Alice in Wonderland	'there's more evidence to come yet, please your majesty,' said the white rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; 'this paper has just been picked up.'
Alice in Wonderland	'what's in it?'
Alice in Wonderland	said the queen.
Alice in Wonderland	'i haven't opened it yet,' said the white rabbit, 'but it seems to be a letter, written by the prisoner to--to somebody.'
Alice in Wonderland	'it must have been that,' said the king, 'unless it was written to nobody, which isn't usual, you know.'
Alice in Wonderland	'who is it directed to?'
Alice in Wonderland	said one of the jurymen.
Alice in Wonderland	'it isn't directed at all,' said the white rabbit; 'in fact, there's nothing written on the outside.'
Alice in Wonderland	he unfolded the paper as he spoke, and added 'it isn't a letter, after all: it's a set of verses.'
Alice in Wonderland	'are they in the prisoner's handwriting?'
Alice in Wonderland	asked another of the jurymen.
Alice in Wonderland	'no, they're not,' said the white rabbit, 'and that's the queerest thing about it.'
Alice in Wonderland	(the jury all looked puzzled.)
Alice in Wonderland	'he must have imitated somebody else's hand,' said the king.
Alice in Wonderland	(the jury all brightened up again.)
Alice in Wonderland	'please your majesty,' said the knave, 'i didn't write it, and they can't prove i did: there's no name signed at the end.'
Alice in Wonderland	'if you didn't sign it,' said the king, 'that only makes the matter worse.
Alice in Wonderland	you must have meant some mischief, or else you'd have signed your name like an honest man.'
Alice in Wonderland	there was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first really clever thing the king had said that day.
Alice in Wonderland	'that proves his guilt,' said the queen.
Alice in Wonderland	'it proves nothing of the sort!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'why, you don't even know what they're about!'
Alice in Wonderland	'read them,' said the king.
Alice in Wonderland	the white rabbit put on his spectacles.
Alice in Wonderland	'where shall i begin, please your majesty?'
Alice in Wonderland	he asked.
Alice in Wonderland	'begin at the beginning,' the king said gravely, 'and go on till you come to the end: then stop.'
Alice in Wonderland	these were the verses the white rabbit read:--  'they told me you had been to her, and mentioned me to him: she gave me a good character, but said i could not swim.
Alice in Wonderland	he sent them word i had not gone (we know it to be true): if she should push the matter on, what would become of you?
Alice in Wonderland	i gave her one, they gave him two, you gave us three or more; they all returned from him to you, though they were mine before.
Alice in Wonderland	if i or she should chance to be involved in this affair, he trusts to you to set them free, exactly as we were.
Alice in Wonderland	my notion was that you had been (before she had this fit) an obstacle that came between him, and ourselves, and it.
Alice in Wonderland	don't let him know she liked them best, for this must ever be a secret, kept from all the rest, between yourself and me.'
Alice in Wonderland	'that's the most important piece of evidence we've heard yet,' said the king, rubbing his hands; 'so now let the jury--'  'if any one of them can explain it,' said alice, (she had grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasn't a bit afraid of interrupting him,) 'i'll give him sixpence.
Alice in Wonderland	_i_ don't believe there's an atom of meaning in it.'
Alice in Wonderland	the jury all wrote down on their slates, 'she doesn't believe there's an atom of meaning in it,' but none of them attempted to explain the paper.
Alice in Wonderland	'if there's no meaning in it,' said the king, 'that saves a world of trouble, you know, as we needn't try to find any.
Alice in Wonderland	and yet i don't know,' he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at them with one eye; 'i seem to see some meaning in them, after all. "
Alice in Wonderland	--said i could not swim--" you can't swim, can you?'
Alice in Wonderland	he added, turning to the knave.
Alice in Wonderland	the knave shook his head sadly.
Alice in Wonderland	'do i look like it?'
Alice in Wonderland	he said.
Alice in Wonderland	(which he certainly did not, being made entirely of cardboard.)
Alice in Wonderland	'all right, so far,' said the king, and he went on muttering over the verses to himself: '"we know it to be true--" that's the jury, of course--"i gave her one, they gave him two--" why, that must be what he did with the tarts, you know--'  'but, it goes on "they all returned from him to you,"' said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'why, there they are!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the king triumphantly, pointing to the tarts on the table.
Alice in Wonderland	'nothing can be clearer than that.
Alice in Wonderland	then again--"before she had this fit--" you never had fits, my dear, i think?'
Alice in Wonderland	he said to the queen.
Alice in Wonderland	'never!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the lizard as she spoke.
Alice in Wonderland	(the unfortunate little bill had left off writing on his slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily began again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long as it lasted.)
Alice in Wonderland	'then the words don't fit you,' said the king, looking round the court with a smile.
Alice in Wonderland	there was a dead silence.
Alice in Wonderland	'it's a pun!'
Alice in Wonderland	the king added in an offended tone, and everybody laughed, 'let the jury consider their verdict,' the king said, for about the twentieth time that day.
Alice in Wonderland	'no, no!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the queen.
Alice in Wonderland	'sentence first--verdict afterwards.'
Alice in Wonderland	'stuff and nonsense!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice loudly.
Alice in Wonderland	'the idea of having the sentence first!'
Alice in Wonderland	'hold your tongue!'
Alice in Wonderland	said the queen, turning purple.
Alice in Wonderland	'i won't!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice.
Alice in Wonderland	'off with her head!'
Alice in Wonderland	the queen shouted at the top of her voice.
Alice in Wonderland	nobody moved.
Alice in Wonderland	'who cares for you?'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, (she had grown to her full size by this time.)
Alice in Wonderland	'you're nothing but a pack of cards!'
Alice in Wonderland	at this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.
Alice in Wonderland	'wake up, alice dear!'
Alice in Wonderland	said her sister; 'why, what a long sleep you've had!'
Alice in Wonderland	'oh, i've had such a curious dream!'
Alice in Wonderland	said alice, and she told her sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange adventures of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she had finished, her sister kissed her, and said, 'it was a curious dream, dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it's getting late.'
Alice in Wonderland	so alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might, what a wonderful dream it had been.
Alice in Wonderland	but her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of little alice and all her wonderful adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion, and this was her dream:--  first, she dreamed of little alice herself, and once again the tiny hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were looking up into hers--she could hear the very tones of her voice, and see that queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair that would always get into her eyes--and still as she listened, or seemed to listen, the whole place around her became alive with the strange creatures of her little sister's dream.
Alice in Wonderland	the long grass rustled at her feet as the white rabbit hurried by--the frightened mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool--she could hear the rattle of the teacups as the march hare and his friends shared their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the queen ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution--once more the pig-baby was sneezing on the duchess's knee, while plates and dishes crashed around it--once more the shriek of the gryphon, the squeaking of the lizard's slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs, filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable mock turtle.
Alice in Wonderland	so she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and all would change to dull reality--the grass would be only rustling in the wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds--the rattling teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells, and the queen's shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd boy--and the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change (she knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farm-yard--while the lowing of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the mock turtle's heavy sobs.
Alice in Wonderland	lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children, and make their eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel with all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys, remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days.
Alice in Wonderland	the end
